# Package Management
The most important determinant of distribution quality is the *packaging system* and the strength of the community. 

Package Management: method of installing and maintaing software on the system

## Packaging Systems
A package is intended for one distribution and not compatible with another.

**The 2 distribution camps of packaging system families**
- Debian camp (.deb) --> Distrbutions: Debian, Ubuntu, Linux Mint and Raspbian
- Red Hat camp (.rpm) --> Distrbutions: Fedora, CentOS, Red Hat Enterprise Linux and OpenSUSE.

### How a Package System Works
Virtually all software for a Linux system can be found on the internet. Most of it will be provided by the distrbution vendor in the form of *package files*.

**Package File:** A compressed collection of files that comprise the software package.
- may consist of numerous programs and data files supporting programs
- includes metadata about the package (text descriptions)
- includes pre/post installation scripts to perform config tasks before/after package installation

**Package Maintainer:** creator of package files who gets the software in source doe from the upstream provider. May apply mods to source code to improve source code integration w/ Linux distribution facets.

**Upstream provider:** Author of program who compiles and creates the package metadata and any installation scripts.

**Repositories**
-Packages are made available to users of a distrbution via *central repositories*.
- A distribution may have diff repositories for diff stages of soft. dev. life cycle (testing/beta/development)
- A distribution may have related third-party repositories needed to supply softweare that (for legal reasons) cannot be included with the normal distribution. (Ex: encrypted DVD support is notallowed in US). These repos are wholly independent of the dist they support.

**Dependencies**
Routines handle common activites such as input/output and are stored in **shared libraries**.

**Dependency**:  a requirement for a shared resource

Modern package mgmt sys provide *dependency resolution* to ensure that a package & all it's dependencies are installed properly. 

**2 Tools of package management systems**
- Low-level tools that handle tasks such as installing and removing package files
- High-level tools that perform metadata searching and dependency resolution

## Common Package Management Tasks

Debian Package Search Commands
- apt-get update
- apt-cache search search_string

Debian Package Installation Commands (permit package downloaded from a repo)
- apt-get update
- apt-get install package_name

Debian Low-Level Package Installation Command (downloaded from a source other than repo)
- dpkg -i package_file

Debian Package Removal Command
- apt-get remove package_name

Debian Package Update Command
- apt-get update; apt-get upgrade

Debian Upgrade a Package from a Package File
- dpkg -i package_file

Debian Listing Command
- dpkg -l

Debian Package Status Commands
- dpkg -s package_name

Debian Display info about installed packaged
- apt-cache show package_name

Debian Package File Identificate Command
- dpkg -S file_name

## Linux Software Installation Myth Main Points
- Linux software ecosystem is based on the idea of open source doe.
If there is a lack of driver support the culprit might be one of the following:
- Device is too new (Linux community need time to support new hardware)
- Device is too exotic (not all distributions include every possible device driver)
- Hardware vendor is hiding something (hasn't released source code or documentation for someone to do so)