# Compiling Programs
The availability of source code is essential freedom making Linux possible.

**Why compile software?**
- Availability (some precompiled programs may not cover everything you need so compile it straight from the source!)
- Timeliness (it can take distributions time to update to the latest versions of a program. Compile it yourself!)

*make* command: Utility to maintain programs

## What is Compiling?
Compiling is the process of translating *source code* (human friendly) into computer friendly language.

CPUs use *machine language* which is a numerical code that describe extremely small operations in binary.

**Assembly language**: replacement for numeric codes with slightly easier-to-use character mnemonics. ex: CPY for copy and MOV for move. Compiled by a program called an *assembler*. Used for specialized programming tasks (device drivers/embedded systems)


**High-level programming languages** 
- allow programs to abstract away details of what processor is doing and solve problem at hand.
ex: FORTRAN (science/technical tasks) or COBOL (business apps)
- Programs written with a high-level programming langauge are compiled with a *compiler*.

linking - last step in conmpiling a program that creates a single executable file from multiple object files.

libraries - provide support for common tasks. contain multiple routines.

routines - perform a common task that can be shared by multiple programs.

linker - a program used to form connections between output of the compilier and the libraries that the compiled program requires.

After compiling you end up with an **executable program file** that is ready for use.

**Are all programs compiled?**
No! Scripting or interpreted languages can write programs that can be executed directly.

Interpreter - a special program that executed scripted languages. Inputs the program file and reads and executes each instruction contained within it. 

*In general* - interpreted programs are executed slower (source code is being translated every time) than compiled program(source code is translated once).

*So why are interpreted programs popular?* Results are fast enough & development is faster/easier.

## Compiling a C Program
gcc : GNU C Compiler
