# Time
Real time corresponds to the everyday definition of time. 

- *Calendar Time*: When real time is measured from a standard point 
- *Elapsed Time*: measured from some point in the life of a process
*Process time* is the amount of CPU time used by a process, and is divided into user and system components.

## Calendar Time
- *gettimeofday()* system call returns the calendar time in the buffer pointed to by tv. 
- *time()* system call returns the number of seconds since the Epoch (midnight on the morning of January 1st 1970)

## Time-Conversion Functions
Various system calls allow us to get and set the system clock value and a range of lib functions allow conversions between calendar time and other time formats, including broken-down time and human-readable character strings. 
**Converting time_t to Printable Form**
- *ctime()* function provides a simple method of converting a time_t value into printable form. Returns a pointer to statically allocated string terminated by newline and \0 on success. 

**Converting Between time_t and Broken-Down Time**
- *gmtime()* function converts a calendar time into a broken-down time corresponding to UTC. 
- *localtime()* function takes into account timezone and DST settings to return a broken-down time corresponding to the system's local time. 
- *mktime()* function translates a broken-down time, expressed as local time, into a time_t value, which is returned as the function result. 

**Converting Between Broken-Down Time and Printable Form**
- *asctime()* returns a pointer to a statically allocated string containing the time in the same form as ctime()
Local timezone settings have no effect on asctime() since it is converting a broken-down time that is localize ia localtime() or in UTC as returned by gmtime(). No control over format returned by asctime. 

**Converting from printable form to broken-down time**
The *strptime()* function converts a date-plus-time string to a broken-down time. Returns a pointer to next unprocessed character in str on success. 

Strptime() format specification contains following types of characters:
- conversion specifications beginning with a percent character(%)
- white-space characters, which match 0 or more white spaces in the input string
- non-white space characters (other than %) which must match exactly the same characters in the input string

## Timezones
Time zone info is defined by the timezone file /etc/localtime.
**Specifying the timezone for a program**
To set timezone of a running program:
- set the TZ environment variable to a string consisting of a colon (:) followed by one of the timezone names defined in /usr/share/zoneinfo. This automatically influences the functions ctime(), localtime(), mktime() and strftime().

## Locales
**Internalizing programs** is a somewhat time consuming job in order to display and input information in the user's perferred language and format. 

**Specifying the locale for a program**
Locale information is maintained in a directory hierarchy under /usr/share/locale. 
Directories are named using the following convention: language[_territory][.codeset]][@modifier]
language - 2 letter ISO language code
territory - 2 letter ISO country code
codeset - designates a character encoding set

The C library searches for a match in the following order:
- codeset
- normalized codeset
- territory
- modifier 
The aim of normalizing is to handle variations in the capitalization and punctuation of codeset names. 
Contents of locale-specific subdirectories
| LC_CTYPE    | A file containing character classifications and rules for case conversion                             |
| LC_COLLATE  | A file containing the collation rules for a character set                                             |
| LC_MONETARY | A file containing formatting rules for monetary values                                                |
| LC_NUMERIC  | A file containing formatting rules for numbers other than monetary values                             |
| LC_TIME     | A file containing formatting rules for dates and times                                                |
| LC_MESSAGES | A directory containing files specifying formats and values used for affirmative and negative response |

The *setlocale()* function is used to both set and query a program's current locale.

The *category* arg selects which part of the locale to set or query and is specified as one of a set of constants whose name are the same as the locale categories.

2 methods of setting the locale using setlocale()
- The locale arg may be a string specifying one of the locales defined on the system
- Locale may be specified as an empty string meaning that the locale settings should be taken from environment variables

## Updating the System Clock
- *settimeofday()* - sets the system's calendar time to the number of seconds and microseconds specified in the timeval structure pointed to be tv. 
- *adjtime()* - causes the system clock to gradually adjust to the desired value.
- *delta* argument points to a timeval structure that specifies the number of seconds and microseconds by which to change the time. 

## The Software Clock (Jiffies)
The system software clock measures time in units called *jiffies*.
The size of a *jiffy* is defined by the constant HZ within the kernel source code. This is the unit in which the kernel allocates the CPU to process under the round-robin timesharing scheduling algo. 

## Process Time
Process time is the amount of CPU time used by a process since it was created. 
2 components of CPU time:
- User CPU time: amount of time spent executing in user mode
- System CPU time: amount of time spent executing in kernel mode

- *times()* system call retrieves process time information, returning it in the structure pointed to by buf.
- *clock()* function provides a simpler interface for retrieving the process time. It returns a single value that measures the total CPU time used by the calling process. 
