# System Limits and Options
A portable application needs ways of determining limit values and whether options are supported. 
## System Limits
SUSv3 specifies limits that an implementation may enforce and system options that an implementation may support. 
Preferred limit determinations:
- <limits.h>
- sysconf()
- pathconf()

3 categories of limit categories:
- runtime invariant values
- pathname variable values
- runtime increasable values

**Runtime invariant values**
*Runtime invariant value* is a limit whose value is fixed for the implementation. However the value may be indeterminate and not present in <limits.h> but then the application can use *sysconf* to determine the value at runtime. 

**Pathname variables values**
*Pathname variable values* are limits that relate to pathnames. Each limit may be constant for the implementation or may vary from one file system to another --> in this case application determine value using *pathconf()* or *fpathconf()*.

**Runtime increases values**
*Runtime increasable value* is a limit that has a fixed minimum value for a particular implementation, and all systems running the implementation will provide at least this minimum value. A specific system may increase this limit at runtime, and an application can find the actual value supported on the system using *sysconf()*.

**Determining limits and options from the shell:getconf**
From the shell *getconf* can be used to obtained the limits and options implemented by a particular UNIX implementation.
$ getconf variable-name [pathname]

## Retrieving System Limits(and Options) at Run Time
The sysconf() function allows an application to obtain the values of system limits at run time. 
Note: To distinguish an indeterminate limit vs an error - errno must be set to 0 before the cal. If the call returns -1 and errno is set after the call then an error occurred. 

SUSv3 requires that the value returned by sysconf() remains constant for the lifetime of the calling process. 

## Retrieving File-Related Limits (and Options) at Run Time
The *pathconf* and *fpathconf* allow an application to obtain the values of file-related limits at run time. 
Difference between the two: manner in which a file or director is specified. *Pathconf* - specified by pathname and *Fpathconf* specified by file descriptor. 

## Indeterminate Limits
On occasion sysconf or pathconf may inform us that that limit is not defined by an implementation limit constant.
- Elect to use the minimum limit value specified by SUSv3
- Ignore the checking of limits and instead perform the relevant system or library function call
- Write the program/function to deduce or estimate the limit. 
- Employ a tool such as GNU Autoconf, an extensible tool that can determine the existence and settings of various system features and limits. 

## System Options
SUSv3 allows an implementation to advise - at both compile time and run time - whether it supports a particular feature. (by defining a corresponding constant in <unistd.h>)

Option constant values:
- -1: Option is not supported
- 0: Option may be supported (When vlaue 0 an app can use sysconf and pathconf/fpathconf to check at run tie whether the option is supported)
- A value greater than 0 means that the option is supported 

## Exercises
Run the programs listed in 11-1 and 11-2