# File I/O Buffering
I/O system calls and I/O functions on the standard C library buffer data when operating on file disks. 

Buffering of input and output data is performed by:
- kernel
- stdio library

If you need to prevent buffering --> Be aware that this will impact application performance. 

## Kernel Buffering of File I/O: The Buffer Cache
read and write sys calls don't directly initiate disk access. They copy data between user-space buffer and a buffer in the kernel *buffer cache*. The system call is not *synchornized* with the disk operation. 

Various system calls and library functions can be used to control kernel and stdio buffering and to perform one-off buffer flushes. 

If available memory is scarce, then the kernel flushes some modified buffer cache pages to disk, in order to free those pages for reuse. 

**Effect of buffer size on I/O system call performance**
If we are transferring a large amount of data to or from a file, then by buffering data in large blocks, and thus performing fewer system calls, we can greatly improve I/O performance. 

The majority of the time required for the large buffer cases is due to the disk reads. 

Where the performance of I/O or other file-system operations is critical, there is no substitue for application-specific benchmarks on target platform. 


## Buffering in the stdio Library
*open()* O_DIRECT flag allows specialized applications to bypass the buffer cache. 

**Setting the buffering mode of a stdio stream**
*setbuf()* function controls the form of buffering employed in the stdio library. This call affects the behavior of all subsequent stdio operations on the specified stream. 

Buf
- if buff is non-NULL then it points to a block of memory of size bytes that is to be used as the buffer for stream & should be statically or dynamically allocated on the heap. It should not e allocated as a local function unless you want to invite chaos to result. 
- if buff is NULL then the stdio library automatically allocates a buffer for use with stream. 

Modes (type of buffering)
- _IONBF: dont buffer I/O (default for stderr)
- _IOLBF: employ line-buffered I/O. Default for streams referring to terminal devices.
- _IOFBF: Employ full buffered IO. Default for streams referring to disk files. 

*setbuffer()* function is similar to setbuf but allows the caller to specify the size of buf.
**Flushing a stdio buffer**
*fflush()* flushes the output buffer for the specified stream. I

## Controlling Kernel Buffering of File I/O
It is necessary if an application must ensure that output really has been written to the disk before continuing. 

**Synchronized I/O data integrity and synchronized I/O file integrity**
*Synchronized I/O completion*: an I/O operation that has either been successfully transferred or diagnose as unsuccessful. 

2 type of synchronized I/O completion:
- Synchronized I/O data integrity completion (ensuring that a file data update transfers sufficient information to allow a later retrieval of that data to proceed)
- Synchronized I/O file integrity completion (superset of synchronized I/O data integrity completion)

**System calls for controlling kernel buffering of file I/O**
*fsync()* system call causes the buffered data and all metadata associated with the open file descriptor fd to be flushed to disk. Calling fsync forces the file to the synchronized I/O file integrity completion state. 

*fdatasync()* system call operates similarly to fsync, but only forces the file to the synchronized I/O data integrity completion state. <- potentially reduces the number of disk operations.

This can be useful for certain apps because it can make considerable performance difference. 

*sync()* system call causes all kernel buffers containing updated file information to be flushed to disk. 

**Making all writes synchronous: O_SYNC**
Specifying O_SYNC flag when calling open() makes all subsequent output synchronous. Following using O_SYNC flag every write() to the file automatically flushing the file data and metadata to the disk. 

**Performance impact of O_SYNC**
O_SYNC impacts performances by increased elapsed times enormously. 

TL;DR: If we need to force flushing of kernel buffers, we should consider whether we can design application to use a large write buffer sizes or make judicious use of occasional calls to fsync() or fdatasync() instead of O_SYNC flag. 

**The O_DSYNC and O_RSYNC flags**

*O_DSYNC*: flag casuses writes to be performed according to the requirements of synchronized I/O data integrity completion.
*O_RSYNC* flag extends the write behaviors of the O_SYNC or O_DSYNC flag to read operations. 

## Summary of I/O Buffering
When the buffer is filled, the stdio library invokes the write() system call, which transfers the data into the kernel buffer cache. Eventually the kernel initiates a disk operation to transfer the data to the disk. 

## Advising the Kernel About I/O Patterns

*posix_fadvise()* can be used to advise kernel of it's likely pattern for accessing data from a specified file. 
The kernel may use this information to optimize the use of the buffer cache == improving I/O performance. 

## Bypassing the Buffer Cache: Direct I/O
Linux allows an appication to bypass the buffer cache when performing disk I/O, thus transferring data directly from user space to a file or disk device. (Sometimes termed direct I/O or raw I/O)

Note: Direct I/O can considerably degrade performance. All optimizations that the kernel implements normally are lost when Direct I/O s used. 

**Alignment restriction for direct I/0**
- The data buffer being transferred must be aligned on a memory boundary that is a multiple of the block size
- The file or device offset at which data transfer commences must be a multiple of the block size
- The length of the data to be transferred must be a multiple of the block size
Failure to observe results in the error EINVAL. 

## Mixing Library Functions and System Calls for File I/O
The *fileno()* and *fdopen()* functions assist us with the task of mixing system calls and standard C library functions to perform I/O on the same file. Given a stream, *fileno()* returns the corresponding file descriptor; *fdopen()* performs the converse operation, creating a new stream the employs a specified open file descriptor. 

No Exercises 