# Fundamentals Concepts

## The Core Operating System: The Kernel
It is possible to run programs on a computer without a kernel *but* having a kernel makes it much more simplistic and increases power/flexibility available to programmers.
**Why?** Because the *kernel* provides a software layer to *manage* the limited resources of a computer. 
**Tasks performed by Kernel**
- Process scheduling: Linux is a *preemptive multitasking OS* meaning that the kernel is controlling which processes receive use of CPU and for how long instead of the processes themselves
- Memory management: Linux uses a virtual memory managements which has 2 advantages: 
1: Processes are isolated from each other and the kernel & cannot read/modify other processes or the kernel. 
2: Only part of a process needs to be kept in the memory thereby lowering memory requirements of each process and allowing more processes to be held in RAM simultaneously. (meaning better CPU utilization) 
- Provision of a file system
- Creation and termination of processes
- Access to devices: provides programs with an interface that standardizes access to devices
- Networking: transmits and receives network messages on user's behalf
- Provision of a system call application programming interface(API)
- Provides user with the abstraction fo a virtual private computer 

*User Mode*: CPU can access only memory that is marked as being in user space. 
*Kernel Mode*: CPU can access both user + kernel sapce.
OS implementers can ensure that user processes are not able to access instructions/data structures of the kernel or perform *bad* operations that would hurt the OS. Can't hurt it if you can't touch it!

**Process viewpoint vs Kernel viewpoint**:
A process operates in isolation - does not directly interact with another process and can't create a new process or end it's own.
A kernel knows ands controls everything. 
A process can effectively *request* that 

## The Shell
*Shell* is a special program that reads commands typed and executes the appropriate programs. In Linux the shell is a *user process*.

## Users and Groups
*Users* have:
- login name
- corresponding userid
- password

*Groups* are identified by:
- group name
- group ID
- user list

*Superuser* has special privileges within system. Has a userID 0 and login name root. Can bypass permission checks and perform admin tasks on the system. 

## Single Directory Hierarchy, Directories, Links and Files
The /root directory is the base of the single hierarchical directory structure to organize all files in the system. 

 Directory is a special file that has contents containing a table of filenames coupled with references to the corresponding files. 
 link : filename + reference association
 Each directory has at least 2 entries:
 - .(dot)
 - ..(dot-dot) which is a link to its parent directory

 Symbolic link: Has a filename + pointer entry in a directory and the file being pointed to contains a string that names another file 


## File I/O Model
Universality of I/) meaning that the same system calls (open(), read(), write(), close())
File Descriptors:
- 0: standard input (stdin)
- 1: standard output (stdout)
- 2: standard error (stderr)

## Programs
2 forms:
- Source code (human readable)
- Script (text file containing commands to be directly processed by programs such as shell or common interpreter)

Filters: program that reads input from stdin, performs a transformation of it, writes to stdout (ex: cat)
Command-line arguments: Words that are supplied on the command line when the program is run 

## Processes
A *process* is an instance of an executing program.  
4 segments of a process:
- Text: instructions of the program
- Data: the static variables used by the program
- Heap: an area from which programs can dynamically allocate extra memory
- Stack: a piece of memory that grows and shrinks as functions are called/return and that is used to allocate storage for local variables and function call linkage information.

A process can request to the kernel to create a new process using the fork() sys call. 
The process that made the call is the *parent process* and the resulting process is the *child process.*
The *child process* inherits copies of the parent's data, stack and heap to modify independently of the parent's.
PID - process identifier
PPID - parent process identifier 

**Termination in 2 ways**
- Request it's own termination by using _exit()
- Be killed by the delivery of a signal
Either will yield a termination status (nonnegative integer) that notifies the type of signal that caused the death of a process. 0 = process succeeded and nonzero = some error occurred. 

Daemon processes:
a special purpose process that is created and handled by the system in the same way as other processes with these characteristics:
- Long-lived
- Runs in the background
Ex: syslogd


**Resource Limits**
- soft limit: limits the amount of the resource that a process may consume
- hard limit: A ceiling on the value to which the soft limit may be adjusted 
Limits can be adjusted using the ulimit command (limit in C shell)

## Memory Mapping
Mapping has 2 categories:
- File mapping maps a region of a file into the calling process's virtual memory.
- Anonymous mapping doesn't have a corresponding file. The pages of the mapping are initialized to 0.

Purposes of Memory Mapping:
- Initialization of a process's text segment from the corresponding segment of an executable file
- allocation of new (zero-filled) memory file
- file I/O (memory-mapped I/0)
- interprocess communication (via a shared mapping)

## Static and Shared Libraries
An *object library* is a file containing the compiled object code for a set of functions that may be called from application programs. 

Modern UNIX systems provide 2 object libraries: 
- static libraries: a structured bundle of compiled object modules
- shared libraries: The linker writes a record into the executable to indicate that at run time the executable needs ot use that shared library. Loaded into memory at run time and the dynamic linker ensures that shared libraries required by the executable are found and loaded into memory. 

## Interprocess Communication and Synchronization
Linux provides a set of mechanisms for interprocess communication (IPC):
- *signals*: used to indicate that an event has occurred
- *pipes*: can be used to transfer data between processes
- *sockets*: can be used to transfer data from one process to another
- *file locking*: allows a process to lock regions of a file in order to prevent other processes from reading or updating the file contents 
- *message queues*: used to exchange messages (packets of data) between processes
- *semaphores*: used to synchronize the actions of processes
- *shared memory*: allows 2 or more processes to share a piece of memory 

## Signals
Often described as *software interrupts*.
Signal type is identified by an integer in the form SIGxxxx.
Signals are sent to a process by the kernel,  by another process or by the process itself. 

3 responses to a signal:
- ignore
- killed by signal
- suspended until later being resumed by receiving a special-purpose signal 

## Threads
Each process can have multiple threads of execution. 
Threads -  a set of processes that share the same virtual memory and a range of other attributes
Each thread shared same program code/data area/heap BUT has its own stack containing local variables and function call linkage information. 

*Advantage of threads*: They make it easy to share data via global variables between threads. Some algos transpose more naturally to a multithreaded implementation than to a multiprocess implementation,. 

## Process Groups and Shell Job Control
Job control: an interactive feature which allows the user to simultaneously execute and manipulate multiple commands or pipelines. 

All processes in a pipeline are placed in a new *process group* or *job*.

## Sessions, Controlling Terminals, and Controlling Processes
A *session* is a collection of process groups (jobs) which share a *session identifier*. The *session leader* is the process that created the session. 

## Pseudoterminals
A *pseudoterminal* is a pair of connected virtual devices (master and slave program) that provides an IPC channel allowing data to be transferred in both directions between two devices. 
Key: The slave device provides an interface that behaves like a terminal making it possible to connect a terminal-oriented program to the slave device then use the master program to drive. 

## Date and Time
2 types:
- *Real Time*: Measured from a standard point (calendar) or fixed point (start in life of a process)
- *Process Time*: CPU time->total amount of CPU time that a process has used since starting. 
Time commands displays real time, system CPU time and user CPU time to execute the processes in a pipeline. 

## Client-Server Architecture
2 component processes:
- Client: asks server to complete a service by sending a message
- Server: examines request, performs appropriate action and sends a response message back to the client

Encapsulating a service within a single server useful because:
- *Efficiency*: Cheaper to provide one instance of a resource 
- *Control, coordination and security*: Server can coordinate access to a resource (so 2 clients don't overwrite same thing) or control access 
- *Operation in a heterogeneous environment*: Can be running on different hardware and OS platforms

## Realtime
Realtime applications are those that need to respond in a timely fashion to input.
Many realtime apps require rapid responses to input the *defining factor* is response is guaranteed within a certain deadline time after an event. 

## The /proc File System
The /proc file system is a virtual file system that provides an interface to kernel data structures in a form that looks like files and directories on a file system. 
