# Signals: Fundamental Concepts

## Concepts and Overview
A signal is a notification that an event has occurred and may be sent to a process by the kernel by another process, or by itself. Sometimes called software interrupts. 

Type of events that cause kernel to generate a signal for a process:
- a hardware exception occurred sending a corresponding signal to the process concerned
- user typed one of the terminal characters that generate signals (ex: Control-C and Control-Z)
- a software event occurred

Signal categories
- traditional
- standard signals 
- realtime signals 
Signal delivery is typically asynchronous (meaning signal interrupts execution of the process is unpredictable).
In some cases, signal delivery can be made synchronously. 

## Signal Types and Default Actions
By default a signal:
- is ignored
- terminates a process
- stops running a process
- restarts a stopped process
The default action depends on the signal type. 

A program can set one of the following dispositions for a signal:
- the default action should occur
- the signal is ignored
- A signal handler is executed 

The *abort()* function generates a SIGABRT signal for the process, which causes it to dump core and terminate. 
Linux signals
| SIGABRT   | abort process               |
| SIGALRM   | Real-time timer expired     |
| SIGBUS    | Memory access error         |
| SIGCHLD   | Child terminated or stopped |
| SIGCONT   | Continue if stopped         |
| SIGEMT    | Hardware fault              |
| SIGFPE    | Arithmetic Exception        |
| SIGHUP    | Hangup                      |
| SIGILL    | ILLEGAL instruction         |
| SIGINT    | Terminal interrupt          |
| SIGIO/    | I/O possible                |
| SIGPOLL   |                             |
| SIGKILL   | Sure kill                   |
| SIGPIPE   | Broken pipe                 |
| SIGPROF   | Profiling timer expired     |
| SIGPWR    | Power aout to fail          |
| SIGQUIT   | Terminal quit               |
| SIGSEGV   | Invalid memory reference    |
| SIGSTKFLT | Stack fault on coprocessor  |
| SIGSTOP   | Sure stop                   |
| SIGSYS    | Invalid system call         |
| SIGTERM   | Terminate process           |
| SIGTRAP   | Trace/breakpoint trap       |
| SIGSTP    | Terminal stop               |
| SIGTTIN   | Terminal read from BG       |
| SIGTTOU   | Terminal write from BG      |
| SIGURG    | Urgent data on socket       |
| SIGUSR2   | User defined signal 1       |
| SIGUSR2   | User defined signal 2       |
| SIGVTALRM | Virtual timer expired       |
| SIGWINCH  | Terminal window size change |
| SIGXCPU   | CPU time limit exceeded     |
| SIGXFSZ   | File size limit exceeded    |

## Changing Signal Dispositions: signal()
*signal()* or *sigaction()* can be used to explicitly ignore a signal or to establish a programmer-defined signal handler function that is invoked when the signal is delivered. 

SIG_DFL: reset the disposition of the signal to its default
SIG_IGN: Ignore the signal

## Introduction to Signal Handlers
A *signal handler/signal catcher* is a function that is called when a specified signal is delivered to a process. 
Establishing a signal handler is best performed using *sigaction()*. 

## Sending Signals: kill()
A process can send a signal to another process using *kill()*. Sending the null signal (0) is a way of determining if a particular process ID is in use. 

4 cases determine how PID is interpreted:
- pid > 0: signal sent to process with the PID
- pid == 0: signal sent to every process in same process group as calling process (including calling process itself)
- pid < -1: signal sent to all of the processes in the process group whose ID equals the absolute value of pid
- pid == -1: signal sent to every process for which the calling process has permission to send a signal, except init and the calling process. 

errno set to ERSCH if no process matches the specified pid & kill fails. 

Permission rules for a process to be able to send a signal to another procesS:
- privileged (CAP_KILL) process can send to any process
- The init process (PID 1) can be sent only signals for which it has a handler installed. (Prevents sys admin from accidentially killing init)
- An unprivileged process can send a signal to another process if the real or effective user ID of the sending process matches the real user ID or saved set-user-ID of the receiving process. 
- SIGCONT sig is special. An unprivileged process may send this signal to any other process in the same session, regardless of user ID checks. 

errno set to EPERM if process doesn't have permission to send a signal to the requested pid.

## Checking for the Existence of a Process
If the sig in kill() is set to 0 then it instead performs error checking to see if the process can be signaled.  A null signal can test if a process with specified PID exists. 
- if errno is set to ESRCH then the process doesn't exist
- if errno is set to EPERM then we know the process does exist

Other techniques:
- wait system calls
- semaphores and exclusive file locks
- IPC channels such as pipes and FIFOs
- The /proc/PID interface

## Other Ways of Sending Signals: raise() and killpg()
*raise()* is useful for a process to send a signal to itself. 
In single threaded programs:
raise == kill(getpid(), sig)
In multi threaded programs:
raise(sig) == pthread_kill(pthread_self(), sig)

*killpg()* sends a signal to all of the members of a process group. 
killpg() == kill(-pgrp, sig)

## Displaying Signal Descriptions
*strisgnal* performs bounds checking on the sig argument, and then returns a pointer to a printable description of the signal, or a pointer to an error string if the signal number was invalid. 

*psignal* displays the string given in its argument msg, followed by a colon, and then the signal description corresponding to sig. 

## Signal Sets
*sigemptyset* initializes a signal set to contain no members.
*sigfillset* initialized a set to contain all signals.
One of *sigemptyset* or *sigfillset* must be used to initialize a signal set. 

After intialization, individual signals can be added to a set using *sigaddset* and removed using *sigdelset*.

*sigismember* is used to test for membership of a set. 

*sigandset* places the intersection of the sets left and right in the set dest
*sigorset* places the union of the sets left and right in the set dest
*sigisemptyset* returns true if set contains no signals. 

## The Signal Mask (Blocking Signal Delivery)
Each process has a *signal mask* which is the set of signals whose delivery is currently blocking. Signals can be added to and removed from the signal mask using *sigprocmask()*.

Ways a signal may be added to the signal mask:
- depends on the flags used when the handler is established using *sigaction*
- when a sig handler established with sigaction, possible to specify an additional set of signals that are to be blocked when the handler is invoked
- sigprocmask call can be used


sigprogmask HOW args:
- SIG_BLOCK: the signals specified in the signal set pointed to by set are added to the signal mask
- SIG_UNBLOCK: the signals in the signal set pointed to be set are removed from the signal mask
- SIG_SETMASK: The signal set pointed to be set is assigned to the signal mask

## Pending Signals
If a signal is received while it is blocked then it remains pending until it is unblocked.
*sigpending* can be used to determine which signals are pending for a process.

## Signals Are Not Queued
Standard signals can't be queued; it can be marked as pending (and thus later delivered) only once. 

A process can use the *sigpending()* system call to retrieve a signal set (a ds used to represent multiple different signals) identifying the signals that it has pending. 

## Changing Signal Dispositions: sigaction()
The *sigaction()* system call provides more control and flexibility than *signal()* when setting the disposition of a signal. 
- Can specify a set of additional signals to be blocked when a handler is invoked
- Various flags can be used to control the actions that occur when a signal handler is invoked
ex: There are flags that select the older unreliable signal semantics.

sa_flags
- SA_NOCLDSTOP
- SA_NOCLDWAIT
- SA_NODEFER
- SA_ONSTACK
- SA_RESETHAND
- SA_RESTART
- SA-SIGINFO

## Waiting for a Signal: pause()
*pause()* can be used to suspend the execution of a process until signal arrives. 

## Exercises
20.1:
Replace the use of signal() by sigaction in the program (sig_reciever.c) 