# Signals: Signal Handlers

## Designing Signal Handlers
Important: reduce the risk of creating race conditions!

2 common designs for signal handlers:
- signal handler sets a global flag and exists. The main program periodically checks this flag, and if it is set, takes appropriate action.
- The signal handlers performs some type of cleanup and then either terminates the process or uses a nonlocal goto to unwind the stack and return control to a predetermined location in the main program.

**Signals are Not Queued**
Because signals are not queued, a signal handler must sometimes be coded to deal with the possibility that multiple events of a particular type have occurred, even though only one signal was delivered. If a signal is generated more than once while the handler is executing, then it is still marked as pending, and it will later be delivered only once. 

**Reentrant and Async-Signal-Safe Functions**
A function is said to be *reentrant* if it can safely be simultaneously executed by multiple threads of execution in the same process. 

A function may be *nonreentrant* if it updates global or static data structures. 
Functions that are nonreentrant (because they return info using statically allocated memory)
- crypt
- getpwnam
- gethostbyname
- getservbyname

The issue of reentrancy affects how we can update global variables and limits the set of functions that we can safely call from a signal handler. 

**Standard async-signal-safe functions**
An *async-signal-safe* function is one that the implementation guarantees to be safe when called from a signal handler. 
A function is async-signal-safe because either:
- it is reentrant
- it is not interruptible by a signal handler

When writing signal handlers we have 2 choices:
- Ensure that the code of the signal handler itself is reentrant and that it calls only async-signal-safe-functions
- Block delivery of signals while executing code in the main program that calls unsafe functions or works with global data structures also updated by the signal handler (This can be difficult in a complex program)
TL,DR: We must not call unsafe functions from within a signal handler

**Use of errno inside signal handlers**
Problem: functions required to be async-signal-safe can nevertheless render a signal handler nonreentrant since they may not overwrite the errno value that was set by a function called from the main program. 

The workaround is to save the value of errno on entry to a signal handler that uses any of the functions and restore the errno value on exit from the handler. 

**Global Variables and the sig_atomic_t Data Type**
It can be useful to share global variables between the main program and a signal handler which can be safely accomplished as long as the main program correctly handles the possibility that the signal handler may change the global variable at any time. 

*sig_atomic_t* reads and writes are guaranteed to be atomic. 

## Other Methods of Terminating a Signal Handler
A signal handler can terminate in a variety of ways
- calling _exit()
- terminating the process by sending a signal (kill, raise, abort or performing a nonlocal goto)

**Performing a Nonlocal Goto from a Signal Handler**
Using *sigsetjmp()* and *siglongjmp()* provides a program with explicit control of the treatment of hte process signal mask when a nonlocal goto is performed. 

Note: we cannot portably use *longjmp* to exit a signal handler. 

*sigprocmask* can be used to temporarily block the signal while sensitive updates are being performed. 

**Terminating a Process Abnormally: abort()**
The *abort* function terminates the calling process and causes it to produce a core dump. (accomplished by raising a SIGABRT signal)

In most implementations, termination is guaranteed as follows:
- if the process still hasn't terminated after raising SIGABRT once
- abort resets the handling of SIGABRT to SIG_DFL and raises a second SIGABRT which is guaranteed to kill the process 

## Handling a Signal on an Alternate Stack: sigaltstack()
Alternative approach to ensure that hte SIGSEGV signal is handled:
- allocate an area of memory, called an alternate signal stack, to be used for the stack frame of a signal handler
- Use the signaltstack system call to inform the kernel of the existence of the alternate signal stack
- When establishing the signal handler, specify the SA_ONSTACK flag to tell the kernel that the frame for this handler should be created on the alternate stack 

*sigaltstack()* can be used to define an alternate signal stack for a process.
This is an area of memory that is used instead of the standard process stack when invoking a signal handler.
An alt signal stack is useful in cases where the standard stack has been exhausted by growing too large (at which point the kernel send a SIGSEGV signal to the process).

ss_flags field:
- SS_ONSTACK: indicates that the process is currently executing on the alternate signal stack
- SS_DISABLE: indicates that there is no currently established alternate signal stack 

## The SA_SIGINFO Flag
The *sigaction()* SA_SIGINFO flag allows us to establish a signal handler that receives additional information about a signal.

**The siginfo_t structure**
This information is supplied via a *siginfo_t* structure whose address is passed as an argument to the signal handler. 

typedef struct {
    int si_signo //Signal number
    int si_code //Signal code
    int si_trapno //Trap number for hardware-generated signal

    union sigval si_value //Accompanying data from sigqueue
    pid_t si_pid //Process ID of sending process
    uid_t si_uid //Real user ID of sender
    int si_errno //Error number (generally unused)
    void *si_addr //Address that generated signal

    int si_overrun //Overrun count
    int si_timerid  //Timer ID

    long si_band    //Band event
    int  si_fd  //File descriptor
    int si_status   //Exit status or signal
    clock_t si_utime    //User CPU time
    clock_t si_stime    //System CPU time  
} siginfo_t

## Interruption and Restarting of System Calls
If a call is interrupted we could manually restart a system call ex:

#define NO_EINTR(stmt) while ((stmt) == -1 && errno == EINTR);

NO_EINTR(cnt = read(fd, buf, BUF_SIZE));
if (cnt == -1)
    errExit("read);

The SA_RESTART flag can be specified when establishing the signal handler with sigaction() so that the system calls are automatically restarted by the kernel on the process's behalf. 

**Modifying the SA_RESTART flag for a signal**
The *siginterrupt* function changes the SA_RESTART setting associated with a signal. 
If flag:
- true(1) then handler for sig will interrupt blocking system calls
- false(0) then blocking system calls will be restarted after execution of a handler for sig

(Recommended that sigaction is used instead of siginterrupt)

**Unhandled stop signals can generate EINTR for some Linux system calls**
When a signal handler interrupts a  blocked system call, the system call fails with the error EINTR. We can take advantage of this behavior to (ex: set a timer on a blocked system call)

Interrupted system calls can be manually restarted if desired. Alternatively, establishing the signal handler with the *sigaction* SA_RESTART flag causes many (but not all) system calls to be automatically restarted. 

