# Monitoring Child Processes

## Waiting on a Child Process
Using *wait* and *waitpid* a parent process can obtain the status of its terminated the stopped children.  

**The wait() system call**
The *wait* system call waits for one of the children of the calling process to terminate and returns the termination status of that child in the buffer pointed to by status. 

Wait outcomes:
- if no child of the calling process has yet terminated, the call blocks until one of the children terminates. If a child has already terminated, wait returns immediately. 
- If status is not NULL, info about how child termd is returned in the integer to which status points.
- The kernel adds the process CPU times and resource usage stats to running totals for all children of this parent process
- wait returns the process ID of the child that has termd

**The waitpid() system call**
Designed to address:
- if parent has multiple children, wait cannot be completed for specific child just next
- if not child has yet terminated, wait always blocks
- Using wait, we can only find about children that have been terminated not ones stopped by a signa

- pid > 0: wait for the child whose process ID equals pid
- pid == 0: wait for any child in the same process group as parent
- pid < -1: wait for any child whose process group identifier equals the absolute value of pid
- pid == -1: wait for any child

**The Wait Status Value**
This status indicates whether a child process terminated normally or abnormally, was stopped by a signal or resumed by a SIGCONT signal.

**Process Termination from a Signal Handler**
To have certain cleanup steps peformed before a process terminates - arrange to have a handler catch such signals, perform the cleanup steps then terminate process.

Note: termination status of a process is available to its parent via *wait* or *waitpid*

**The waitid() system call**
*waitid* returns the status of a childprocess however it has additional functionality over waitpid with flags:
- WEXITED (wait for children that have been terminated, either normally or abnormally)
- WSTOPPED (wait for children that have been stopped by a signal)
- WCONTINUED (wait for children that have been resumed by a SIGCONT signal)
- WNOHANG: If no children matching specification in id, return immediately
- WNOWAIT: child status is returned but the child remains in a waitable state, and we can later wait for it again to retrieve the same info

idtype and id arguments:
- P_ALL: wait for any child (id is ignored)
- P_PID: wait for all the child whose process ID equals id
- P_PGID: wait for any child whose process group ID equals id

**The wait3() and wait4() system calls**
*wait 3* and *wait 4* return resource usage information about the terminated child in the structure pointed to by the rusage argument. 
wait 3: waits for any child
wait 4: wait s for a specific child/children 

## Orphans and Zombies
If a child's parent terminates, the child becomes an orphan and is adopted by the init process, whose process ID is 1.
When a child process terminates, it becomes a zombie, and is removed from the system only when its parent calls *wait* to retrieve the child's status. Long-running programs such as shells and daemons should be designed so that they always reap the status of the child processes they create, since a process in the zombie state can't be killed, and unreaped zombies will eventually clog the kernel process table. 
TL,DR: parent process should always perform wait calls to ensure that dead children are always removed from the system.

## The SIGCHLD Signal
A parent cannot predict when one of it's children will terminate. Solution: employ SIGCHLD signal

**Establishing a Handler for SIGCHLD**
A common way of reaping dead child processes is to establish a handler for the SIGCHLD signal. This signal is delivered to a parent process whenever one of its children terminates, and optionally when a child is stopped by a signal.

You can loop inside the SIGCHLD handler, repeatedly calling waitpid with the WNOHANG flag until there are no more dead children to be reaped.

```
while (waitpid(-1, NULL, WNOHANG) > 0) 
    continue;
```

**Design issues for SIGCHLD handlers**
A portable application should establish the SIGCHLD handler before creating any children. 
Sometmes necessary to code a SIGCHLD handler to save errno in a local variable on entry to the handler, and then restore the errno value just prior to returning.

**Delivery of SIGCHLD for Stopped Children**
It is possible for a parent process to receive the SIGCHLD signal whe none of its children is stopped by a signal --> controll by the SA_NOCLDSTOP flag when using sigaction() to establish a handler for the SIGCHLD signal. 
- if flag ommitted: a SIGCHILD signal is delivered to the parent when one of its children stops
- if flag present: SIGCHLD is not delivered for stopped children

**Ignoring Dead Child Processes**
Explicitly setting SIGCLD to SIG_IGN causes any child process that subsequently terminate to be immediately removed from the system instead of turning into zombie. 
 Alternatively, but somewhat less portably, a process may elect to set the disposition of SIGCHLD to SIG_IGN, in which case the status of terminated children is immediately discarded (and thus can't later be retrieved by the parent) and children don't become zombies. 

**The sigaction() SA_NOCLDWAIT flag**
Establishing a handler with S_NOCLDWAIT leaves it unspecified whether or not a SIGCHLD signal is sent to the parent when a child terminates. 

**The system V SIGCLD signal**
Key difference between BSD SIGCHLD and System V SIGCLD:
- On historical SD implementations, the system continues to generate zombies for unwaited-for children, even when SIGCHLD is ignored
- On System V, using signal to ignore SIGCLD has the result that zombies are not generated when childre died

## Exercises
26-1:

26-2:

26-3:

26-4: