# Program Execution

## Executing a New Program: execve()
The *execve* system call loads a new program into a process's memory. 
Using *execve()* process can replace the program that it is currently running by a new program.
Arguments to the *execve* call allows the specification of the argument list (argv) and environment list for the new program.
Various similarly named library functions are layered on top of execve() and provide different interfaces to the same functionality.

Possible errors:
- EACCES: the pathname arg doesn't refer to a reg file, the file doesn't have execute permissions enabled or one of the directory components of pathname is not searchable
- ENOENT: The file referred to by pathname doesn't exist
- ENOEXEC: The file referred to be pathname is marked as being executable but it is not in a recognizable executable format
- ETXTBSY: The file referred to by pathname is open for writing by one of more processes
- E2BIG: The total space required by the argument list and environment list exceeds the allowed maximum

## The exec() Library Functions

- execle:
- execlp:
- execvp:
- execv:
- execl:

**The PATH Environment Variable**
The PATH value for a login shell is set by system-wide and user-specific shell startup scripts. Since a child process inherits a copy of its parent's environment variables, each process that the shell creates to execute a command inherits a copy of the shell's PATH. 
absolute: specified with initial /
or relative is interpreted with respect to the current working directory of the calling process
current: specified with .

**Specifying Program Arguments as a List**
When we know the number of arguments for an exec a the time we write a program, we can use execle, execlp, or execl to specify the arguments as a list within the function call. 

```
#include "tlpi_hdr.h"

int
main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
    char *envVec[] = { "GREET=salut", "BYE=adieu", NULL };
    char *filename;

    if (argc != 2 || strcmp(argv[1], "--help") == 0)
        usageErr("%s pathname\n", argv[0]);

    /* Execute the program specified in argv[1] */

    filename = strrchr(argv[1], '/');       /* Get basename from argv[1] */
    if (filename != NULL)
        filename++;
    else
        filename = argv[1];

    execle(argv[1], filename, "hello world", "goodbye", (char *) NULL, envVec);
    errExit("execle");          /* If we get here, something went wrong */
}
```

**Passing the Caller's Environment to the New Program**
The execle, execlp, or execl functions don't permit the programmer to explicitly specify an environment list; instead, the new program inherits its environment from the calling process. 
```
#include <stdlib.h>
#include "tlpi_hdr.h"

int
main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
    printf("Initial value of USER: %s\n", getenv("USER"));
    if (putenv("USER=britta") != 0)
        errExit("putenv");

    /* exec printenv to display the USER and SHELL environment vars */

    execl("/usr/bin/printenv", "printenv", "USER", "SHELL", (char *) NULL);
    errExit("execl");           /* If we get here, something went wrong */
}
```

**Executing a File Referred to by a Descriptor: fexecve()**
Using fexecve() is useful for apps that want to open a file, verify its contents by performing a checksum, and then execute the file. 

## Interpreter Scripts
An *interpreter* is a program that reads commands in text form and executes them. 
All of the exec() functions can be used to load a binary executable file or to execute an interpreter script. 

**Execution of interpreter scripts**
When a process execs a script, the script's interpreter program replaces the program currently being executed by the process.

**Using the script optional-arg**
One use of the optional-arg in a script's initial #! line is to specify command-line options for the interpreter. 

**Executing scripts with execlp() and execvp()**
The script's interpreter is normally identified by an initial line (starting with the characters #!) in the script that specifies the pathname of the interpreter. If no such line is present, then the script is executable only via *execlp* or *execvp* and these functions exec the shell as the script interpreter.

## File Descriptors and exec()
By default, all file descriptors opened by a program that calls exec remaind open across the exec and are available for use by the new program. Useful b/c calling program may open new files on particular descriptors and these files are automatically available to the new program without needing to know names of or open the files. 

**The close-on-exec flag(FD_CLOEXEC)**
*close-on-exec* flag is set then the file descriptor is automatically closed during a successful exec(), but left open if the exec fails. The close-on-exec flag for a file descriptor can be accessed using the fcntl() system call. 
Setting the close-on-exec flag for a file descriptor 
```
#include <fcntl.h>
#include "tlpi_hdr.h"

int
main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
    int flags;

    if (argc > 1) {
        flags = fcntl(STDOUT_FILENO, F_GETFD);              /* Fetch flags */
        if (flags == -1)
            errExit("fcntl - F_GETFD");

        flags |= FD_CLOEXEC;                    /* Turn on FD_CLOEXEC */

        if (fcntl(STDOUT_FILENO, F_SETFD, flags) == -1)     /* Update flags */
            errExit("fcntl - F_SETFD");
    }

    execlp("ls", "ls", "-l", argv[0], (char *) NULL);
    errExit("execlp");
}
```
## Signals and exec()
During an exec, the text of the existing process is discarded. This text may include signal handlers established by the calling program. Because the handlers disappear, the kernel resets the dispositions of all handled signals to SIG_DFL. The dispositions of all other signals are left unchanged by an exec. 

It is acceptable to block or ignore signals when execing a program we have written or one with known behavior with respect to signals. 

## Executing a Shell Command: system()
The *system* function allows the calling program to execute an arbitrary shell command.  The system function creates a child process that invokes a shell to execute command.

Advantage of system:
- don't need to handler details fo calling fork, exec, wait and exit
- Error and signal handling are performed by system on our behalf
- all of the usual shell processing, substitutions and redirections are performed on command before it is executed

Main cost: inefficiency (Requires the creation of at least two processes)

Return value of system:
- If command is a null pointer == system returns a nonzero value and 0 if no shell is available
- If child process could not be created or its termination status could not be retrieved, then system returns -1
- If a shell could not be execed in the child process, then system returns a value as though the child shell had terminated with the call _exit(127)
- If all system calls succeed == then system returns the termination status of the child shell used to execute command

**Avoid using system() in set-user-ID and set-group-ID programs**
Set-user-ID and set-group-ID programs should never use system() while operating under the program's privileged identifier. 
Secure programs that need to spawn another program should use fork() and one of the exec functions - other than execlp or execvp - directly. 

## Implementing system()
We showed how fork(), exec(), exit() and wait() can be combined to implement the system() function, which can be used to execute an arbitrary shell command. 

**A simple implementation of system()**
```
#include <unistd.h>
#include <sys/wait.h>
#include <sys/types.h>

int
system(char *command)
{
    int status;
    pid_t childPid;

    switch (childPid = fork()) {
    case -1: /* Error */
        return -1;

    case 0: /* Child */
        execl("/bin/sh", "sh", "-c", command, (char *) NULL);
        _exit(127);                     /* Failed exec */

    default: /* Parent */
        if (waitpid(childPid, &status, 0) == -1)
            return -1;
        else
            return status;
    }
}
```
**Treating signals correctly inside system()**
system() must block delivery of SIGCHLD while it is executing.
When we type the interrupt or quit characters, all thre eprocesses are sent the corresponding signal. The shell ignores SIGINT and SIGQUIT while waiting for its child. 

How should the calling process and the executed command respond to these signals:
- SIGINT and SIGQUIT should be ignored in the calling process while the command is being executed
- In the child, SIGINT and SIGQUIT should be treated as they would be if the calling process did a fork and exec; that is, the disposition of handled signals is reset to the default, and the disposition of other signals remains nuchanged. 

**An improved system() implementation**
```
#include <unistd.h>
#include <signal.h>
#include <sys/wait.h>
#include <sys/types.h>
#include <errno.h>

int
system(const char *command)
{
    sigset_t blockMask, origMask;
    struct sigaction saIgnore, saOrigQuit, saOrigInt, saDefault;
    pid_t childPid;
    int status, savedErrno;

    if (command == NULL)                /* Is a shell available? */
        return system(":") == 0;

    /* The parent process (the caller of system()) blocks SIGCHLD
       and ignore SIGINT and SIGQUIT while the child is executing.
       We must change the signal settings prior to forking, to avoid
       possible race conditions. This means that we must undo the
       effects of the following in the child after fork(). */

    sigemptyset(&blockMask);            /* Block SIGCHLD */
    sigaddset(&blockMask, SIGCHLD);
    sigprocmask(SIG_BLOCK, &blockMask, &origMask);

    saIgnore.sa_handler = SIG_IGN;      /* Ignore SIGINT and SIGQUIT */
    saIgnore.sa_flags = 0;
    sigemptyset(&saIgnore.sa_mask);
    sigaction(SIGINT, &saIgnore, &saOrigInt);
    sigaction(SIGQUIT, &saIgnore, &saOrigQuit);

    switch (childPid = fork()) {
    case -1: /* fork() failed */
        status = -1;
        break;          /* Carry on to reset signal attributes */

    case 0: /* Child: exec command */

        /* We ignore possible error returns because the only specified error
           is for a failed exec(), and because errors in these calls can't
           affect the caller of system() (which is a separate process) */

        saDefault.sa_handler = SIG_DFL;
        saDefault.sa_flags = 0;
        sigemptyset(&saDefault.sa_mask);

        if (saOrigInt.sa_handler != SIG_IGN)
            sigaction(SIGINT, &saDefault, NULL);
        if (saOrigQuit.sa_handler != SIG_IGN)
            sigaction(SIGQUIT, &saDefault, NULL);

        sigprocmask(SIG_SETMASK, &origMask, NULL);

        execl("/bin/sh", "sh", "-c", command, (char *) NULL);
        _exit(127);                     /* We could not exec the shell */

    default: /* Parent: wait for our child to terminate */

        /* We must use waitpid() for this task; using wait() could inadvertently
           collect the status of one of the caller's other children */

        while (waitpid(childPid, &status, 0) == -1) {
            if (errno != EINTR) {       /* Error other than EINTR */
                status = -1;
                break;                  /* So exit loop */
            }
        }
        break;
    }

    /* Unblock SIGCHLD, restore dispositions of SIGINT and SIGQUIT */

    savedErrno = errno;                 /* The following may change 'errno' */

    sigprocmask(SIG_SETMASK, &origMask, NULL);
    sigaction(SIGINT, &saOrigInt, NULL);
    sigaction(SIGQUIT, &saOrigQuit, NULL);

    errno = savedErrno;

    return status;
}
```

## Exercises

27-1:
Fails to exec the file xyc in dir1 because execute permissions are denied then search in dir2 for the successful execs xyz.
 
27-3:
#!/bin/cat -n
Hello world

27-4: (corrected with full solution from book as my answer was sparse comparitvely )
Two successive fork() calls yield a total of three processes related as parent, child, and grandchild. Having created the grandchild process, the child immediately exits, and is reaped by the waitpid() call in the parent. As a consequence of being orphaned, the grandchild is adopted by init (process ID of 1). The program doesn't need to perform a second wait() call, since init automatically reaps the zombie when the grandchild terminates. Therein lies a possible use for this code sequence: if we need to create a child for which we can't later wait, then this sequence can be the parent execs some program that is not guaranteed to perform a wait (and we don't want to rely on setting the disposition fo SIGCHLD to SIG_IGN since the disposition of an ignored SIGCHLD after an exec is left unspecified by SUSv3)

27-5: (corrected by book)
The string given to printf() doesn't include a newline char, and therefore the output is not flushed before the execlp call. The execlp overwrites the existing program's data segments (as well as the heap and stack), which contains the stdio buffers, and thus the unflushed output is lost.