# Threads: Introduction

## Overview
*Threads* are a mechanism that permits an app to perform multiple tasks concurrently. 

A single process may contain multiple threads. They are independently executing the same program and share the same global memory.

In a multithreaded process, multiple threads are concurrently executing the same program. All of the threads share the same global and heap variables, but each thread has a private stack for local variables.

## Background Details of the Pthreads API
POSIX threads == Pthreads 

Pthreads data types
| pthread_t           | Thread identifier                       |
| pthread_mutex_t     | Mutex                                   |
| pthread_mutexattr_t | Mutext attributes object                |
| pthread_cond_t      | Condition variable                      |
| pthread_condattr_t  | Condition variable attributes object    |
| pthread_key_t       | Key for thread-specific data            |
| pthread_once_t      | One-time initialization control context |
| pthread_attr_t      | Thread attributes object                |

A program should avoid any reliance on knowledge of the structure or contents of a vraible of one of these types. 

**Threads and errno**
In threaded programs, each thread has its own *errno* value. 
errno is defined as a macro that expands into a function call returning a modifiable lvalue that is distinct for each thread. 

Tl,DR; The *errno* mechanism has been adapted for threads in a manner that leaves error reporting unchanged from the traditional UNIX API. 

The threads in a process also share a number of other attributes:
- process ID
- open file descriptors
- signal dispositions
- current working directory
- resource limits

**Return value from Pthreads functions**
All Pthreads functions return 0 on success or a positive value on failure. The failure vlaue is one of the same values that can be placed in errno by traditional UNIX system calls. 

**Compiling Pthreads programs**
programs that use the Pthreads API must be compiled with the cc -pthread option.

Effects of cc -pthread:
- The _REENTRANT preprocessor macro is defined.
- The program is linked with the libpthread library

## Thread Creation
Threads are created using *pthread_create()*. 
After a call to *pthread_create()*, a program has no guarantees about which thread will next be scheduled to use the PCU. Programs that implicitly rely on a particular order of scheduling are open to race conditions. If we need to enforce a particular order of execution - we must use on of the synchronization techniques. 

## Thread Termination
Each thread can then independently terminate using *pthread_exit()* which then specifies a return value that can be obtained in another thread calling *pthread_join*.
If any thread calls *exit()* then all threads immediately terminate.

Termination types:
- The thread's start function performs a return specifying a return value for the thread
- The thread calls pthread_exit 
- The thread is canceled using pthread_cancel
- Any of the threads call exit, or the main thread performs a return which causes all threads in the process to terminate immediately 

## Thread IDs
*pthread_create* returns  a thread's unique ID. The thread can obtain its own ID using *pthread_self*. 
Uses of thread ids:
- various pthreads functions use thread IDs to identify the thread on which they are to act
- Useful to tag dynamic data structures with the ID of a particular thread

*pthread_equal* function allows us to check whether two thread IDs are the same.

POSIX thread IDs != thread IDs returned by the Linux gettid sys call. 

## Joining with a terminated thread
The *pthread_join* function waits for the thread identified by thread to terminate (if that thread has already terminated *pthread_join* returns immediately).

Unless a thread has been marked as detached (eg: via a call to pthread_detach()), it must be joined by another thread using *pthread_join()* which returns the termination status of the joined thread.

**Pthread_join VS waitpid**
- Threads are eers. Any thread in a proces scan use pthread_join to join with another thread in process.
- There is no way of saying join with any thread, nor is there any way to do a nonblocking join (ex: waitpid()WNOHANG flag)

```
#include <pthread.h>
#include "tlpi_hdr.h"

static void *
threadFunc(void *arg)
{
    char *s = (char *) arg;

    printf("%s", s);

    return (void *) strlen(s);
}

int
main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
    pthread_t t1;
    void *res;
    int s;

    s = pthread_create(&t1, NULL, threadFunc, "Hello world\n");
    if (s != 0)
        errExitEN(s, "pthread_create");

    printf("Message from main()\n");
    s = pthread_join(t1, &res);
    if (s != 0)
        errExitEN(s, "pthread_join");

    printf("Thread returned %ld\n", (long) res);

    exit(EXIT_SUCCESS);
}
```

## Detaching a Thread
Mark a thread as *detatched* by making a call to *pthread_detach* specifying the thread's identifier. 
Once a thread has been detached, it is no longer possible to use *pthread_join* to obtain its return status, and the thread can't be made joinable again. 

Detaching a hread doesn't make it immune to a call to exit in another thread or a return in the meain thread. 

TL,DR: *pthread_detach* simply controls what happens after a thread terminates, not how it terminates.

## Thread Attributes
Similar to a process:
- process ID and parent process ID
- process group ID and session ID
- controlling terminal
- process credentials
- open file descriptors
- record locks created using fcntl
- signal dispositions
- file system - related info: unmask, current working directory and root directory
- interval timers (settimer) and POSIX timers(timer_create())
- System V sempahore undo values
- resource limits
- CPU time consumed (times())
- resources consumed (getrusage())
- nice value (set by setpriority() and nice())

Unique to a thread:
- thread ID
- signal mask
- thread-specific data
- alternate signal stack
- the errno variable
- floating-point environment
- realtime scheduling policy and priority
- CPU affinity
- capabilities
- stack

## Threads Vs Processes
Key diff: Easier sharing of info through threads.
This is the main reason that some app designs map better onto a multithreaded design than onto a multiprocess design. 

Threads can also provide *better performance for some operations* but this factor is usually *secondary* in influencing the choices of threads versus processes. 

Processes:
- difficult to share info between processes
- process creation is relatively expensive

In contrast, Threads:
- sharing info is easy and fast (just a matter of copying data into shared variables)
- Thread creation is faster than process creation (typically 10x)
Disadvantages:
- when programming with threads, we need to ensure that the functions we call are thread-safe or are called in a thread-safe manner.
- A bug in one thread can damage all of the threads in the process, since they share the same address space and other attributes
- Each thread is competing for use of the finite virtual address space of the hose process

What to keep in mind when choosing thread vs processes:
- dealing with signals in a multithreaded apps requires careful design
- in a multithreaded app, all threads must be running the same program. In a multiprocess app, different processes can run different programs
- Aside from data, threads also share certain other info.


# Exercises
29-1:
2 possible outcomes:
- a thread deadlock occuring
- pthread_join fails and the error EDEADLK is returned

29-2:
threadFunc will not be terminated after the main thread terminates. This can result in chaos.