# System Programming Concepts

## System Calls
A *system call* is a controlled entry point into the kernel for the process to make  a request to the kernel to do something on the process's behalf.

- A sys call changes process state user mode ->kernel mode bc CPU needs to access protected kernel memory
- set of system calls is fixed

Invoking a system call looks much like calling a C function 

## Library Functions
Often times library functions provides a user friendly interface to make a system call than the underlying system call. 

## Handling Errors from Sys Calls and Library Functions

**Handling system call errors**
Technique: When a sys call fails - set the global integer variable errno (#include <errno.h>) to a positive value indicating the specific error.

Note: errno is never reset to 0 so variable may have non-0 value from a previous failed call. 
Best practice:
1st: check if function return value indicates an error
2nd: then examine errno to determine the cause of the error

**3 categories of indications of failed library function calls**
- -1 return value with errno for specific error
- non -1 return value with errno set to a specific error condition
- Doesn't user errno at all

## Portability Issues

**Feature Test Macros**
Feature test macros can be used to expose only the definitions that follow a particular standard (ex: #define_BSD_SOURCE 1)
 
 **System Data Types**
 Size of fundamental data types vary across UNIX implementations and even on 1 single unix implementation the types used to represent information may differ between releases of the implementations. (ex: user and group IDS 2.2: 16 bits but 2.4: 32 bits)

 **To get a macro that is not defined on all UNIX implementations - use #ifdef**
 ex:
 #ifdef WCOREDUMP
    //use wcoredump macro
#endif

## Summary
Even relatively simple sys calls have a much high overhead vs user-space function calls due to the switch from user to kernel mode.
We can improve portability of system programs by using *the system data types defined in various standards* rather than natives. 

## Exercise
3.1:
The hex conversion shows that the set of magic numbers are Linux Torvalds and his daughter's birth date. How neat!
