# Threads: Thread Synchronization
The greater sharing provided by threads comes at a cost.
Threaded applications must employ synchronization primitives such as mutexes and condition variables in order to coordinate access to shared variables.

## Protecting Accesses to Shared Variables: Mutexes
A mutex (mutual exclusion) provides exclusive access to a shared variable.
2 states:
- locked (acquired)
- unlocked (release)
Attempting to lock a mutex that is already locked either blocks or fails with error (depending on method used to place lock).

When a thread locks a mutex it becomes an owner of that mutex. Only owner can unlock. 

*critical section* refers to a section of code that accesses a shared resource and whose execution should be *atomic* (cannot be interrupted)

Protocol for accessing a resource:
- lock the mutex for the shared resource
- access the shared resource
- unlock the mutex

Note: mutex locking is advisory rather than mandatory but in order to safely handle shared variables, all threads must cooperate in their use of a mutex, abiding by its locking rules. 

**Statically Allocated Mutexes**
A mutex can either be allocated as a static variable or created dynamically at run time. 

For a statically allocated mutex, we can do this by assigning it the value PTHREAD_MUTEX_INITIALIZER:
```
pthread_mutex_t mtx = PTHREAD_MUTEXT_INITIALIZER;
```

**Locking and Unlocking a Mutex**
After initialization, a mutex is locked.
Lock: pthread_mutex_lock() (If unlocked - call locks mutex and returns immediately. If not, blocks until mutex is unlocked. Once unlocked it will lock mutex and return.)
Unlock: pthread_mutex_unlock() (Error to unlock a mutext not currrently locked or to unlock a mutext locked by another thread)

**pthread_mutext_trylock() and pthread_mutext_timedlock()**
*pthread_mutext_trylock* tries to lock a mutext but if it fails it will return error EBUSY instead of waiting.
*pthread_mutext_timedlock* tries to lock a mutext, will wait a time amount trying to aquire - if expires without caller becoming owner returned error ETIMEDOUT.

**Performance of Mutexes**
Mutexes are implemented using atomic machine-language operations and require system calls only in case of lock contention. 

**Mutex Deadlock**
When more than one thread is locking the same set of mutexes, deadlock situations can arise. 
The simplest way to avoid such deadlocks: define a mutext hierarchy.
Alternative strategy: "try and then back off" (less efficient)

**Dynamically Initializing a Mutex**
We must dynamically initialize the mutext using *pthread_mutex_init()*.
Cases for dynamically initializing a mutex:
- mutex was dynamically allocated on the heap
- mutex is automatic variable allocated on the stack
- we want to initialize a statically allocated mutex with attributes other than the defaults

Destroy using: *pthread_mutex_destroy()*
It is safe to destroy a mutex *only* when it is unlocked & no thread will subsequently try to lock it. 

**Mutex Attributes**
One of the attributes that can be set for a mutex: its type

**Mutex Types**
- PTHREAD_MUTEX_NORMAL: Self-deadlock detection is not provided for this type of mutext. If a thread tries to lock a mutext that it has already locked, then deadlock results. Unlocking a mutex that is not locked or that is locked by another thread produces undefined results. 
- PTHREAD_MUTEX_ERRORCHECK: Error checking is performed on all operations. All three of the above scenarios cause the relevant Pthreads function to return an error. This type is typically slower than normal - but useful as debugging tool to see where app is violating rules about mutex usage.
- PTHREAD_MUTEX_RECURSIVE: A recursive mutex maintains the concept of a lock count. When a thread first acquires the mutex, the lock count is set to 1. Each subsequent lock operation by the same thread increments the lock count and each unlock operation decrements the count. The mutex is released only when lock count falls to 0. 

## Signaling Changes of State: Condition Variables
A condition variable allows one or more threads to wait for notification that some other thread has changed the state of a shared variable. A condition variable is always used in conjunction with a mutex. The mutex provides mutual exclusion for accessing the shared variable, while the condition variable is used to signal changes in the variable's state. 

**Statically Allocated Condition Variables**
For a statically allocated condition variable, that is done by assigning it the value PTHREAD_COND_INITIALIZER:
```
pthread_cond_t cond = PTHREAD_COND_INITIALIZER;
```

**Signaling and Waiting on Condition Variables**
Signaling: 
- pthread_cond_signal (guaranteed that atleast one of the blocked threads is woken up) <-- more efficient. Should only b eused if it doesn't matter which thread is woken up.
- pthread_cond_broadcast (ALL blocked threads are woken up) <-- always will succeed

Wait:
- pthread_cond_wait (blocks a thread until the condition variable cond is signaled)
- pthread_cond_timedwait : if expires without condition variable being signaled: returns the error ETIMEDOUT

**Testing a Condition Variable's Predicate**
Cannot make assumptions about state of the predicate upon return form pthread_cond_wait:
- other threads may have woken up first
- designing for "loose predicates" may be simpler
- Spurious wakeups can occur

**Example Program: Joining any Terminated Thread**
```
#include <pthread.h>
#include "tlpi_hdr.h"

static pthread_cond_t threadDied = PTHREAD_COND_INITIALIZER;
static pthread_mutex_t threadMutex = PTHREAD_MUTEX_INITIALIZER;
                /* Protects all of the following global variables */

static int totThreads = 0;      /* Total number of threads created */
static int numLive = 0;         /* Total number of threads still alive or
                                   terminated but not yet joined */
static int numUnjoined = 0;     /* Number of terminated threads that
                                   have not yet been joined */
enum tstate {                   /* Thread states */
    TS_ALIVE,                   /* Thread is alive */
    TS_TERMINATED,              /* Thread terminated, not yet joined */
    TS_JOINED                   /* Thread terminated, and joined */
};

static struct {                 /* Info about each thread */
    pthread_t tid;              /* ID of this thread */
    enum tstate state;          /* Thread state (TS_* constants above) */
    int sleepTime;              /* Number seconds to live before terminating */
} *thread;

static void *                   /* Start function for thread */
threadFunc(void *arg)
{
    int idx = (int) arg;
    int s;

    sleep(thread[idx].sleepTime);       /* Simulate doing some work */
    printf("Thread %d terminating\n", idx);

    s = pthread_mutex_lock(&threadMutex);
    if (s != 0)
        errExitEN(s, "pthread_mutex_lock");

    numUnjoined++;
    thread[idx].state = TS_TERMINATED;

    s = pthread_mutex_unlock(&threadMutex);
    if (s != 0)
        errExitEN(s, "pthread_mutex_unlock");
    s = pthread_cond_signal(&threadDied);
    if (s != 0)
        errExitEN(s, "pthread_cond_signal");

    return NULL;
}

int
main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
    int s, idx;

    if (argc < 2 || strcmp(argv[1], "--help") == 0)
        usageErr("%s num-secs...\n", argv[0]);

    thread = calloc(argc - 1, sizeof(*thread));
    if (thread == NULL)
        errExit("calloc");

    /* Create all threads */

    for (idx = 0; idx < argc - 1; idx++) {
        thread[idx].sleepTime = getInt(argv[idx + 1], GN_NONNEG, NULL);
        thread[idx].state = TS_ALIVE;
        s = pthread_create(&thread[idx].tid, NULL, threadFunc, (void *) idx);
        if (s != 0)
            errExitEN(s, "pthread_create");
    }

    totThreads = argc - 1;
    numLive = totThreads;

    /* Join with terminated threads */

    while (numLive > 0) {
        s = pthread_mutex_lock(&threadMutex);
        if (s != 0)
            errExitEN(s, "pthread_mutex_lock");

        while (numUnjoined == 0) {
            s = pthread_cond_wait(&threadDied, &threadMutex);
            if (s != 0)
                errExitEN(s, "pthread_cond_wait");
        }

        for (idx = 0; idx < totThreads; idx++) {
            if (thread[idx].state == TS_TERMINATED) {
                s = pthread_join(thread[idx].tid, NULL);
                if (s != 0)
                    errExitEN(s, "pthread_join");

                thread[idx].state = TS_JOINED;
                numLive--;
                numUnjoined--;

                printf("Reaped thread %d (numLive=%d)\n", idx, numLive);
            }
        }

        s = pthread_mutex_unlock(&threadMutex);
        if (s != 0)
            errExitEN(s, "pthread_mutex_unlock");
    }

    exit(EXIT_SUCCESS);
}
```

**Dynamically Allocated Condition Variables**
The *pthread_cond_init* function is used to dynamically initialize a condition variable. 

It is not necessary to call pthread_cond_destroy on a condition variable that was statically initialized using PTHREAD_COND_INITIALIZER. 

## Exercises
30-1