# Threads: Thread Safety and Per-Thread Storage

## Thread Safety (and Reentrancy Revisited)
A function is *thread safe* if it can be invoked from multiple threads at the same time. The usual reason a function is not thread-safe is that it makes use of global or static variables. 

*serialized*: only one thread at a time can execute the function

One way to render a non-thread safe function safe in a multithreaded application is to guard all calls to the function with a mutex lock. This approach suffers the problem that it reduces concurrency, because only one thread can be in the function at any time.

An approach that allows greater concurrency is to add mutex locks around just those parts of the function that manipulate shared variables (the critical sections). Mutexes can be used to render most functions thread-safe, but they carry a performance penalty because there is a cost to locking and unlocking a mutex. By avoiding the use of global and static variables, a reentrant function achieves thread-safety without the use of mutexes. 
By avoiding the use of global and static variables, a reentrant function achieves thread-safety without the use of mutexes. 


**Non-thread-safe functions**
To facilitate the development of threaded applications, all of the functions specified in SUSv3 are required to be implement in a thread safe manner except the following:
SUSv3
- the *ctermid* and *tmpnam* functions need to be thread-safe if passed a NULL argument
- the *wcrtomb* and *wcsrtombs* functions need to not be thread-safe if their final argument (ps) is NULL. 

SUSv4 (modifies the list of functions )
- the ecvt, fcvt, gcvt and gethostbyname and gethostbyaddr functions are removed, since these functions have been removed from the standard.
- the *strsignal* and *system* function are added. (system is nonreentrant because the manipulations that it must make to siganl dispositions have a process-wide effect)

Functions that SUSv3 does not require to be thread-safe:
- asctime
- basename
- catgets
- crypt
- ctime
- dbm_clearerr
- dbm_close
- dbm_delete
- dbm_error
- dbm_fetch
- dbm_firstkey
- dbm_nextkey
- dbm_open
- dbm_store
- dirname
- dlerror
- drand48
- ecvt
- encrypt
- endgrent
- endpwent
- endutxent
- fcvt
- ftw
- gcvt
- getc_unlocked
- getchar_unlocked
- getdate
- getenv
- getgrent
- getgrgid
- getgrnam
- gethostbyaddr
- gethostbyname
- gethostent
- getlogin
- getnetbyaddr
- getnetbyname
- getnetnet
- getopt
- getprotobyname
- getprotobynumber
- getprotoent
- getpwent
- getpwnam
- getpwuid
- getservbyname
- getservbyport
- getservent
- getutxent
- getutxid
- getutxline
- gmtime
- hcreate
- hdestroy
- hsearch
- inet_ntoa
- l64a
- lgamma
- lgammaf
- lgammal
- localeconv
- localtime
- lrang48
- mrand48
- nftw
- nl_langinfo
- ptsname
- putc_unlocked
- putchar_unlocked
- putenv
- pututxline
- rand
- readdir
- setenv
- setgrent
- setkey
- setpwent
- setutxent
- sterror
- strtok
- ttyname
- unsetenv
- wcstombs
- wctomb


**Reentrant and nonreentrant functions**
By avoiding the use of global and static variables, a reentrant function achieves thread-safety without the use of mutexes. 

Not all functions can be made reentrant - some of the reasons can be:
- By nature, some functions must access global data structures.
- Some functions have an interface that by definition is nonreentrant, because they return pointers to storage statically allocated by the function, or they employ static storage to maintain information between successive calls to the same function. 



Most of the functions specified in SUSv3 are required to be thread-safe. SUSv3 also lists a small set of functions that are not required to be thread-safe. Typically, these are functions that employ static storage to return information to the caller or to maintain information between successive calls. By definition, such functions are not reentrant, and mutexes can't be used to make them thread-safe. We considered two roughly equivalent coding techniques - thread-specific data and thread-local storage- that can be used to render an unsafe function thread-safe without needing to change its interface. Both of these techniques allow a function to allocate persistent, per-thread storage. 

## One-time Initialization
Sometimes a threaded application needs to ensure that some initialization action occurs just once, regardless of how many threads are created. 

A library function can perform one-time initialization using the *pthread_once* function. 
pthread_once_t once_var = PTHREAD_ONCE_INIT;

## Thread-Specific Data
Thread-specific data is a technique for making an existing function thread-safe without changing its interface. Thread-specific data is persistent; each thread's variable continues to exist between the thread's invocations of the function. This allows the function to maintain per-thread information between calls to the function, and allows the function to pass distinct result buffers to each calling thread. 

## Thread-specific Data from the Library Function's Perspective
- function must allocate a seperate block of storage for each thread that calls the function
- On each subsequent call from the same thread, the function needs to be able to obtain the address of the storage block that was allocated the first time this thread called function.
- different functions may each need thread-specific data. Each function needs a method of identifying its thread-specifc data as a distinct from the thread-specifc data used by other functions. 

## Overview of the Thread-specific data API
General steps that a library function performs in order to use thread-specific data:
- function creates a key, which is the means of differentiating the thread-specific data item used by this function from the thread-specific data items used by other functions. The key is created by calling the pthread_key_create function. Creating a key needs to be done only once, when the first thread calls the function. For this purpose, pthread_once is employed Creating a key that doesn't allocate any blocks of thread-specific data. 
- the call to pthread_key_create serves a second purpose: it allows the caller to specifiy the address of the programmer-defined destructor function that is used to deallocate each of the storage blocks allocated for this key. When a thread that has thread-specific data terminates, the Pthreads API automatically invokes the destructor, passing it a pointer to the data block for this thread.
- the function allocates a thread-specific data block for each thread from which it is called. This is done using malloc() (or similar function). This allocations is done once for each thread, the first time the thread calls the function. 
- In order to save a pointer to the storage allocated in the previous step, the function employs two Pthreads functions: pthread_setspecific and pthread_getspecific. A call to pthread_setspecific is a request to the Pthreads implementation to say "save this pointer, recording the fact that it is associated with a particular key and a particular thread." Calling viously associated with a given key for the calling thread. If no pointer was previously associated with a particular key and thread, then phtread_getspecific returns NULL. This is how a function can determine that it is being called for the first time by this thread, and thus must allocate the storage block for the thread. 

## Details of the Thread-Specific Data API
*pthread_key_create* creates a new thread-specific data key that is returned to the caller in the buffer pointed to by key. 

When a thread is first created, all of its thread-specific data pointers are initializaed to NULL. This means that when our library function is called by a thread or the first time, it must begin by using pthread_getspecific to check whether the thread already has an associated value for key. 

## Employing the Thread-Specific Data API


Example of thread-safe implementation of strerror using thread-specific data
```
#define _GNU_SOURCE                 /* Get '_sys_nerr' and '_sys_errlist'
                                       declarations from <stdio.h> */
#include <stdio.h>
#include <string.h>                 /* Get declaration of strerror() */
#include <pthread.h>
#include "tlpi_hdr.h"

static pthread_once_t once = PTHREAD_ONCE_INIT;
static pthread_key_t strerrorKey;

#define MAX_ERROR_LEN 256           /* Maximum length of string in per-thread
                                       buffer returned by strerror() */

static void                         /* Free thread-specific data buffer */
destructor(void *buf)
{
    free(buf);
}

static void                         /* One-time key creation function */
createKey(void)
{
    int s;

    /* Allocate a unique thread-specific data key and save the address
       of the destructor for thread-specific data buffers */

    s = pthread_key_create(&strerrorKey, destructor);
    if (s != 0)
        errExitEN(s, "pthread_key_create");
}

char *
strerror(int err)
{
    int s;
    char *buf;

    /* Make first caller allocate key for thread-specific data */

    s = pthread_once(&once, createKey);
    if (s != 0)
        errExitEN(s, "pthread_once");

    buf = pthread_getspecific(strerrorKey);
    if (buf == NULL) {          /* If first call from this thread, allocate
                                   buffer for thread, and save its location */
        buf = malloc(MAX_ERROR_LEN);
        if (buf == NULL)
            errExit("malloc");

        s = pthread_setspecific(strerrorKey, buf);
        if (s != 0)
            errExitEN(s, "pthread_setspecific");
    }

    if (err < 0 || err >= _sys_nerr || _sys_errlist[err] == NULL) {
        snprintf(buf, MAX_ERROR_LEN, "Unknown error %d", err);
    } else {
        strncpy(buf, _sys_errlist[err], MAX_ERROR_LEN - 1);
        buf[MAX_ERROR_LEN - 1] = '\0';          /* Ensure null termination */
    }

    return buf;
}

```
## Thread-specific Data Implementation Limits
An implementation may need to impose limits on the number of thread-specific data keys that it supports. 
If a function requires multiple thread-specific data values, these can usually be placed in a single structure that has just one associated thread-specific data key. 

## Thread-Local Storage
The main advantage of thread-local storage is that it is much simpler to use than thread-specific data. To create a thread-local variable, we simply include the _thread specifier in the declaration of a global or static variable/
```
#define _GNU_SOURCE                 /* Get '_sys_nerr' and '_sys_errlist'
                                       declarations from <stdio.h> */
#include <stdio.h>
#include <string.h>                 /* Get declaration of strerror() */
#include <pthread.h>

#define MAX_ERROR_LEN 256           /* Maximum length of string in per-thread
                                       buffer returned by strerror() */

static __thread char buf[MAX_ERROR_LEN];
                                    /* Thread-local return buffer */

char *
strerror(int err)
{
    if (err < 0 || err >= _sys_nerr || _sys_errlist[err] == NULL) {
        snprintf(buf, MAX_ERROR_LEN, "Unknown error %d", err);
    } else {
        strncpy(buf, _sys_errlist[err], MAX_ERROR_LEN - 1);
        buf[MAX_ERROR_LEN - 1] = '\0';          /* Ensure null termination */
    }

    return buf;
}


```