# File I/O: The Universal I/O Model
*File Descriptors* (usually a small non-0 number) are used for all system calls performing I/O.

stdin - 0
stdout - 1
stderr - 2


Example Note: After an freopen() on stdout you cannot assume that the underlying file descriptor is 1 still.

## Four Key System Calls
- **fd = open(pathname, flags, mode)**: opens the file identified by pathname, returning a file descriptor used to refer to the open file in subsequent calls. 
- **numread = read(fd, buffer, count)**: reads at most count bytes from the open file (fd) and stores in buffer.
- **numwritten = write(fd, buffer, count)**: writes up to count bytes from buffer to the open file 
- **status = close(fd)**: release the file descriptor and associated kernel resources

**Universality of I/O**
The same four system calls - open(), read(), write() and close() are used to perform I/O on all types of files. 

## Opening a File: open()
*open()* opens an existing file or creates + opens a new file. 
If success: open() returns a file descriptor that can be used to refer to the file in subsequent system calls.
If error: open() returns -1 and errno is set accordingly. 

**Access Modes**
- *O_RDONLY*: opens with reading only
- *O_WRONLY*: opens with writing only
- *O_RDWR*: opens file for both reading and writing
- *O_CLOEXEC*: Set the close-on-exec flag ( Note: Necessary in multithreaded programs to avoid the race conditions)
- *O_CREAT*: Create file if it doesn't already exist
- *O_DIRECTORY*: Fail if pathname is not a directory
- *O_EXEC*: With O_CREAT: create file exclusively
- *O_LARGEFILE*: Used on 32-bit systems to open large files
- *O_NOCTTY*: Don't let pathname become the controlling terminal
- *O_NOFOLLOW*: Don't dereference symbolic links
- *O_TRUNC*: Truncate existing file to zero length
- *O_APPEND*: Writes are always appended to the end of file
- *O_ASYNC*: Generates a signal when I/O is possible
- *O_DIRECT*: File I/O bypasses buffer cache
- *O_DSYNC*: Provide synchronized I/O data integrity
- *O_NOATIME*: Don't update file last access time on read()
- *O_NONBLOCK*: Open in nonblocking mode
- *O_SYNC*: Make file writes synchronous 

## Errors from open()
- *EACCES* - file permissions or directory permissions don't allow opening or the file did not exist and could not be created.
- *ESDIR* - can't be opened because its a directory
- *EMFILE* - The process resource limit on the number of open file descriptors have been reached.
- *ENFILE* - the system-wide limit on the number of open files has been reached.
- *ENOENT* - The specified file doesn't exist or path to it doesn't exist/work
- *EROFS* - The specified file is on a read-only file system and the caller tried to open it for writing
- *ETXTBSY* - Specified file is an executable file that is currently executing. 

**Creat()** creates and opens a new file with given pathname *or* if file exists opens file and truncates it to 0 length. 

## Reading from a File: read() 
The *read()* sys call reads data from the open file referred to by the descriptor fd. 

Note: Sys calls don't allocate memory for buffers that are used to return information to the caller. Instead, must pass a pointer to a previously allocated memory buffer of correct size. 

A *successful call* will return the number of bytes read or 0 if end-of-file is encountered.
A *error* will return -1.

Cannot attend to the C convention of null terminating character strings.

## Writing to a file: write()
The *write()* system call writes data to an open file. 

A *successful call* returns the number of bytes actually written.

## Closing a file: close()
The close() system call closes an open file descriptor, freeing it for subsequent reuse by the process. 
Returns 0 on success or -1 on error. 

## Changing the File Offset: lseek()
File offset/read-write offset or pointer: The location in the file at which the next read() or write() will commence. 

The *lseek()* sys call adjusts file offset of the open file referred to by the file descriptor fd according to offset and whence. 
Returns new file offset if successful or -1 on error. 

**Options for whence**
- *SEEK_SET*: File offset is set offset bytes from the beginning of the file
- *SEEK_CUR*: File offset is adjusted by offset bytes relative to the current file offset.
- *SEEK_END*: File offset set to the size of the file + offset. 


**File holes** are created by writing data at a position beyond the previous end of the file. Reading from a file hole returns bytes containing 0s.

The *ioctl()* sys call is a catchall for device and file ops that don't fit the standard file I/O model. 



## Exercises 
4.1:

4.2: 