# Interprocess Communication Overview

## A Taxonomy of IPC Facilities 
Communication: facilities concerned with exchanging data between processes
Synchronization: facilities concerned with synchronizing the actions of processes or threads. 
signals: used for synchronization or number itself is a form of information & realtime signals can be accompanied by associated data. 

IPC is used as a general term to describe all three. 

## Communication Facilities
2 categories:
- Data-transfer facilities: One transfer from user memory to kernel memory during writing and another transfer from kernel memory to user memory during reading. 
- Shared memory: allows process to exchange info by placing it in a region of memory accessible between processes. 


- pipes
- FIFOs
- sockets
- messages queues
- shared memory

**Data Transfer**
- Byte stream data exchanged via pipes, FIFOs and stream sockets
- Message: data exchanged via System V message queues, POSIX message queues, and datagram sockets.
- Pseudoterminals: a pseudoterminal is a communication facility intended for use in specialized situations. 

Note:
- reads are destructive. A read operation consumes data nd that data is not available to any other process. 
- synch between reader and writer is automatic. 

**Shared memory**
3 types of shared memory:
- System V shared memory
- POSIX shared memory
- Memory mappings

Notes:
- Shared memory provides fast communication but that advantage is offset by the need to synchronize operations on the shared memory.
- Data placed in shared memory is visible to all of the processes that share that memory. 

## Synchronization Facilities
- semaphores
- file locks
- mutexes and condition variables

## Comparing IPC Facilities

**IPC object identification and handles for open objects**
In order to access an IPC object, a process must have some means of identifying the object, and once the object has been "opened" the process must use some type of handle to refer to the open object.

**Functionality**
diff between data-transfer facilities and shared memory:
- Data transfer facilities: Flow control between writer and reader, as well as synchronization is automatically handled by the kernel. This model fits well with many application designs.
- shared memory model: Shared memory allows one process to make data visible to any number of other processes sharing the same memory region. communication ops are simple - a process can access data in shared memory in the same manner as it accesses any other memory in its virtual address space. 

Note:
- record locks placed using fcntl are owned by the process placing the lock. The kernel uses this ownership to detect deadlocks. If deadlock occurs kernel denies the lock request of one of hte processes. But System V and POSIX sempahores don't have this issue  bc no ownereship property - no deadlock detection occurs for semaphores. 
- Record locks placed using fcntly are automatically released when the process that owns the lock terminates. System V semaphores provide a similar feature (undo) but thats not reliable in all circumstances. POSIX sempahores don't provide an analog of this feature. 

**Network communication**
Only sockets permit processes to communicate over a network. Sockets are generally used in one of two domains : 
- Unix domain (allows communication between processes on the same system)
- Internet domain (allows communication between processes on different hosts connected via TCP/IP network)

**Portability**
System V IPC preferred as more portable to POSIX IPC. 

**System V IPC design issues**
- System V IPC facilities are connectionless --> can require additional programming effort for an application to be able to know when an object can safely be deleted.
- Programming interfaces are inconsistent with the traditional UNIX I/O model and overly complex.

**Accessibility**
Important characteristic of each type of IPC object: the permissions scheme that governs which processes can access the object. 
Accessibility:
- Pipe: only by related processes
- FIFO: permissions mask
- UNIX domain socket: permissions mask
- Internet domain socket: by any process
- System V message queue: permissions mask
- System V semaphore: permissions mask
- System V shared memory: permissions mask
- POSIX message queue: permissions mask
- POSIX named semaphore: permissions mask
- POSIX unnamed semaphore: permissions of underlying memory
- POSIX shared memory: permissions mask
- Anonymous mapping: only by related processes
- Memory-mapped file: permissions mask
- flock() file lock: open() of file
- fcntl() file lock: open() of file

**Persistence**
Persistence: lifetime of an IPC object
3 types:
- process persistence: remains in existence only as long as it is held open by at least one process
- kernel persistence: exists until either it is explicitly deleted or the system is shut down
- file-system persistence: retains information even when the system is rebooted

**Performance**
If IPC performance is crucial, there is not substitute for application-specific benchmarks run under an environment that matches the target system. 

# Exercises 
