# System V Semaphores

System V Semaphores are *not* used to transfer data between processes. Instead, they allow processes to synchronize their actions. 

Common use: to synch access to a block of shared memory.

## Overview
System V semaphores allow processes to synchronize their actions. This is useful when a process must gain exclusive access to some shared resource, such as a region of shared memory. 

General steps:
- Create or open a semaphore set using semget()
- Initialize the semaphores in the set using the semctl() SETVAL or SETALL operation
- Perform operations on semaphore values using semop(). The processes using the semaphore typically uses these operations to indicate acquisition and release of a shared resource. 
- When all processes have finished using the semaphore set, remove the set using the semctl() IPC_RMID operation.

System V semaphore are unusually complex bc they are allocated in groups called *semaphore sets*. The number in the set is specified when the set is created using semget(). 

It's common to operate on a single semaphore at one time although their is ability to atomically perform a group of operations on multiple semaphores in the same set. 

Race conditions can result if two processes try to perform these steps at the same time. 


## Creating or Opening a Semaphore Set
*semget* creates a new semaphore set or obtains the identifier of an existing set.
args: 
- nsems: specifies the number of semaphores
- semflg: a bit mask specifying the permissions to be placed on a new semaphore set or checked against an existing set


Flags:
- IPC_CREAT: If not semaphore set with the specified key exists, create a new set.
- IPC_EXCL: If IPC_CREAT was also specified, and a semaphore set with the specified key already exists, fail with the error EEXIST.

## Semaphore Control Operations
The *semctl* system call performs a variety of control operations on a semaphore set or on an individual semaphore within a set. 
args:
- semid: identifier of the semaphore set on which the operation is to be performed
- semnum: identifies a particular semaphore within the set
- cmd: specifies the operation to be performed 
- union semun arg: optional argument

**Generic control operations**
- IPC_RMID: Immediately remove the semaphore set and its associated semid_ds data structure. Any processes blocked in semop() calls waiting on semaphores in this set are immediately awakened, with semop() reporting the error EIDRM. The arg is not required.

- IPC_STAT: Place a copy of the semid_ds data structure associated with this semaphore set in the buffer pointed to by arg.buf. 

- IPC_SET: Update selected fields of the semid_ds data structure associated with this semaphore set using values in the buffer pointed to be arg.buf.

**Retrieving and initializing semaphore values**
- GETVAL: As its function result, semctl() returns the value of the semnum-th semaphore in the semaphore set specified by semid. 
- SETVAL: The value of the semnum-th semaphore in the set referred to by semid is initialized to the value specified in arg.val.
- GETALL: Retrieve the values of all of the semaphores in the set referred to by semid, placing them in the array pointed to by arg.array. The programmer must ensure that this array is of sufficient size.
- SETALL: Initialize all semaphores in the set referred to by semid, using the values supplied in the array pointed to be arg.array. The semnum argument is ignored. 

Changing the value of a semaphore with SETVAL or SETALL clears the undo entries for that semaphore in all processes.

Note that the information returned by GETVAL and GETALL may already be out of data by the time the calling process comes to use it. 

**Retrieving per-semaphore information**
- GETPID: returns the process id of the last process to perform a semop() on this semaphore; this is referred to as the sempid value. If no process has yet performed a semop() on this semaphore, 0 is returned.

- GETNCNT: Return the number of processes currently waiting for the value of this semaphore to increase; this is referred to as the semncnt value.

- GETZCNT: Return the number of processes currently waiting for the value of this semaphore to become 0; this is referred to as the semzcnt value. 


## Semaphore Associated Data Structure
struct semid_ds {
    struct ipc_perm sem_perm;   /* Ownership and permissions */
    time_t  sem_otime;          /* Time of last semop() */
    time_t  sem_ctime;          /* Time of last change */
    unsigned long   sem_nsems;  /* Number of semaphores in set */
};

Fields of semid_ds:
- sem_perm: When the semaphore set is created, the fields of this substructure are initialized. The uid, gid and mode subfields can be updated via IPC_SET.

- sem_otime: This field is set to 0 when the semaphore set is created, and then set to the current time on each successful semop() or when the semaphore value is modified as a consequence of a SEM_UNDO operation. this field and sem_ctime are typed as time_t and store time in seconds since the Epoch.

- sem_ctime: This field is set to the current time when the semaphore set is created and on each successful IPC_SET, SETALL, SETVAL.

- sem_nsems: When the set is created, this field is initialized to the number of semaphores in the set.


**Monitoring a semaphore set**
```
#include <sys/types.h>
#include <sys/sem.h>
#include <time.h>
#include "semun.h"                      /* Definition of semun union */
#include "tlpi_hdr.h"

int
main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
    struct semid_ds ds;
    union semun arg, dummy;             /* Fourth argument for semctl() */
    int semid, j;

    if (argc != 2 || strcmp(argv[1], "--help") == 0)
        usageErr("%s semid\n", argv[0]);

    semid = getInt(argv[1], 0, "semid");

    arg.buf = &ds;
    if (semctl(semid, 0, IPC_STAT, arg) == -1)
        errExit("semctl");

    printf("Semaphore changed: %s", ctime(&ds.sem_ctime));
    printf("Last semop():      %s", ctime(&ds.sem_otime));

    /* Display per-semaphore information */

    arg.array = calloc(ds.sem_nsems, sizeof(arg.array[0]));
    if (arg.array == NULL)
        errExit("calloc");
    if (semctl(semid, 0, GETALL, arg) == -1)
        errExit("semctl-GETALL");

    printf("Sem #  Value  SEMPID  SEMNCNT  SEMZCNT\n");

    for (j = 0; j < ds.sem_nsems; j++)
        printf("%3d   %5d   %5d  %5d    %5d\n", j, arg.array[j],
                semctl(semid, j, GETPID, dummy),
                semctl(semid, j, GETNCNT, dummy),
                semctl(semid, j, GETZCNT, dummy));

    exit(EXIT_SUCCESS);
}
```


**Initializing all semaphores in a set**
A semaphore implementation is not required to initialize the members of a new semaphore set, so an application must initialize the set after creating it. When any of a number of peer processes may try to create and initialize the set after creating it. When any of a number of peer processes may try to create and initialize the semaphore, special care must be taken to avoid the race condition that results from the fact that these two steps are performed via separate system calls. 

## Semaphore Initialization 
An implementation is not required to initialize the values of the semaphores in a set created by semget(). Instead it must explicitly initialize the semaphores using the semctl() system call. 

The fact that semaphore creation and initialization must be performed by separate system calls, instead of in a single atomic ste, leads to possible race conditions when initializing a semaphore. 

## Semaphore Operations 
Semaphores are created and operated upon in sets containing one or more semaphores. Each semaphore within a set is an integer whose value is always greater than or equal to 0. The semop() system call allows the caller to add an integer to a semaphore, subtract an integer from a semaphore or wait for a semaphore to equal 0. The last two of these operations may cause the caller to block. 

elements of the sops array are structures of the following form:
struct sembuf {
    unsigned short sem_num; /* Semaphore number */
    short   sem_op;         /* Operation to be performed */
    short   sem_flg;        /* Operation flags (IPC_NOWAIT and SEM_UNDO) */
};


sem_op:
- sem_op > 0: the value of sem_op is added to the semaphore value. As a result, other processes waiting to decrease the semaphore value may be awakened and perform their operations. The calling process must have alter (write) permissions on the semaphore.

- sem_op = 0: the value of the semaphore is checked to see whether it currently equals 0. If it does - op completes immediately. Otherwise semop blocks until semaphore value becomes 0. The calling process must have read permissions on the semaphore. 

- sem_op < 0: decrease the value of the semaphore by the absolute value of sem_op. If the current value of the semaphore is greater than or equa to the absolute value of sem_op, the operation completes immediately. Otherwise, semop() blocks until the semaphore value has been increased to a level that permits the operation to be performed without resulting in a negative value. The calling process must have alter permissions on the semaphore. 

When semop() call blocks the process remains blocked until one of the following occurs:
- Another process modifies the value of the semaphore such that the requested operation can proceed.
- A signal interrupts the semop() call. In this case error EINTR results.
- Another process deletes the semaphore referred to by semid. Fails with error EIDRM. 

*semtimedop*: performs the same task as semop except that the timeout arg specifies an upper limit on the time for which the call will block. 


## Handling of Multiple Blocked Semaphore Operations
Where multiple processes are trying to decrease a semaphore by the same amount, it is indeterminate which process will actually be permitted to perform the operation first. However, where different processes are trying to decrease a semaphore by different amounts, the operations complete in the order in which they become possible, and we may need to take care to avoid scenarios where a process is starved because the semaphore value never reaches a level that would allow the process's operation to proceed. 

## Semaphore Undo Values
The SEM_UNDO flag allows a process's semaphore operation to be automatically undone on process termination. This can be useful to avoid scenarios where a process accidentally terminates, leaving a semaphore in a state that causes other processes to block indefinitely waiting for the semaphore's value to be changed by the terminated process.

**Limitations of SEM_UNDO**
- modifying a semaphore typically corresponds to acquiring or releasing some shared resource, the use of SEM_UNDO on its own may be insufficient to allow a multiprocess application to recover in the event that a process unexpectedly terminates.
- In some cases, it is not possible to perform semaphore adjustments when a process terminates. 

3 possible solutions:
- force the process to block until the semaphore adjusment is possible
- decrease the semaphore value as far as possible and exit
- exit without performing any semaphore adjustment

## Implementing a Binary Semaphores Protocol
- Reserve: Attempt to reserve this semaphore for exclusive use. If the semaphore is already reserved by another process, then block until the semaphore is released.

- Release: Free a currently reserved semaphore, so that it cna be reserved by another process.

- Reserve conditionally: Make a nonblocking attempt to reserve this semaphore for exclusive use. If the semaphore, is already reserved, then immediately return a status indicating that the semaphore is unavailable.


## Semaphore Limits

- SEMAEM: max value that can be recorded in a semadj total
- SEMMNI: system-wide limit on the number of semaphore identifiers that can be created 
- SEMMSL: max number of semaphores that can be allocated in a semaphore set
- SEMMNS: system-wide limit of number of semaphores in all semaphore set. The number of semaphores on the system is also limited by SEMMNI and SEMMSL; in fact, the default value for SEMMNS is the product of the defaults for these two limits.
- SEMOPM: max number of operations per semop() call
- SEMVMX: max value for a semaphore

Unix limitations:
- SEMMNU: system-wide limit on the total number of semaphore undo structures. Undo structures are allocated to store semadj values.
- SEMUME: max number of undo entries per semaphore undo sturcture. 

## Disadvantages of System V Semaphores 
System V semaphores are allocated and operated upon in sets, and can be increased and decreased by arbitrary amounts. This provides more functionality than is needed by most applications. A common requirement is for individual binary semaphores, which take on only the values 0 and 1. 

## Exercises

47-1

47-2