# File I/O: Further Details

## Atomicity and Race Conditions
*Atomicity* - the actions performed by a sys call are executed as a single uninterruptible step (ensured by the kernel).

*Race conditions/race hazards*: is a situation where the result produced by two processes (or threads) operating on a shared resources depends in an unexpected way on the relative order in which the processes gain access to the CPU(s).

Example of trying to create/open two files simultaneously 
- The fact that the outcome of these operations depends on the order of scheduling of the two processes means that this is a race condition.
- Using a single open() call with O_CREAT and O_EXCL flags guarantees that the check and creation steps are carried out as a single atomic operation and cannot be interrupted. 

**Appending data to a file**
If multiple processes are trying to append data to the same file we have the same need for atomicity. 
Using O_APPEND guarantees us the atomicity necessary. 

## File Control Operations: fcntly()
The *fcntl()* system call performs a range of control operations on an open file descriptor. 
Return value on success depends on cmd performed or -1 if error. 

## Open File Status Flags

**Uses**
Fcntl() can be used to retrieve or modify the access mode and open file status flags of an open file using cmd as F_GETFL. 
- To check the access mode of the file - mask the *flags* value with the constant O_ACCMODE and then test for equality with one of the constants.
```
accessMode = flags & O_ACCMODE;
if (accessMODE == 0_WRONLY || accessMode == O_RDWR)
printf("file is writeable \n)
```
-  Modify some of the open file status flags used fcntl()F_SETFL (Able to modify: O_APPEND, O_NONBLOCK, O_NOATIME, O_ASYNC and O_DIRECT)

## Relationship Between File Descriptors and Open Files
It is possible (and sometimes useful) to have multiple descriptors referring to the same open file. 

An *open file description* stores all info relating to an open file:
- The current file offset (as updated by read() and write() or explicitly modified using lseek())
- status flags specified when opening the file
- the file access mode
- settings relating to signal-driven I/O
- a reference to the i-node object for this file

The *i-node* for each file includes the following info:
- file type
- a pointer to a list of locks held on this file
- various properties of the file (size/timestamps/etc)

## Duplicating File Descriptors
The *dup()* call takes oldfd, an open file descriptor, and returns a new descriptor that refers to the same open file description. 
```
int dup(int oldfd);
```
Returns new file descriptor on success or -1 on error. 

The *dup2()* sys call makes a duplicate of the file descriptor given in oldfd using the descriptor number supplied in newfd. If the file descriptor specified in newfd is already open, dup2 closes it first. The closing and reuse of newfd are performed atomically - *avoiding* the possibility that newfd is reused between the two steps in a signal handler or a parallel thread. 
```
int dup2(int oldfd, int newfd);
```
Returns new file descriptors on success or -1 on error.

The fcntl() *F_DUPFD* operation makes a duplicate of oldfd by using the lowest unused file descriptor greater than or equal to startfd. --> useful to guarantee that the newfd falls in a certain range of values. 
```
newfd  = fcntl(old fd, F_DUPFD, startfd);
```
The *dup3()* sys call performs the same tasks as *dup2()* but adds an argument, flags, that is a bit mask that modifies the behavior of the system call. 

## File I/O at a Specified Offset: pread() and pwrite()
pread and pwrite operate like read nad write except that the file I/O is performed at the location specified by offset rather than a current file offset. The file offset is left unchanged by these calls.
Using pread & pwrite is useful because multiple threads can simultaneously perform I/O on the same file descriptor without being affected by changes made to the file offset by other threads. 
**Can be used to avoid race conditions**

## Scatter-Gather I/O: readv() and writev()
readv() and writev() transfer multiple buffers of data in a single system call. The set of buffers to be transferred is defined by the arary iov. The integer iovcnt specifies the number of elements in iov. 

*Scatter input*: reads a contiguous sequence of bytes from the file referred to by the file descriptor fd and places ("scatters") these bytes into the buffers specified by iov. 

*Note*: readv() completes atomically  meaning that when reading from a file we can be sure that the range of bytes read is contiguous. On successful completion readv returns the number of bytes read or 0 if end of file encountered. 

The *writev()* call performs the gather output - it concatenates ("gathers") data from all the buffers specified by iov and writes them as a sequence of contiguous bytes to the file referred to by the file descriptor. 


**Primary advantage of readv and writev**: Speed and convenience. Useful for multithreaded applications that want to combine the benefits of scatter/gather I/O at the file location specified by offset. 

## Truncating a File: truncate() and ftruncate()
The *truncate and ftruncate* sys calls set the size of a file to the value specified by length. 
If the file is longer than length - excess data is lost. If file shorter than length - extended by padding with a sequence of null bytes or a hole. 

**Differences**
Difference betwen truncate and ftruncate is how the file is specified. 
 - truncate: file is specified as a pathname strin
 - ftruncate: takes a descriptor for a file that has been opened for writing

 Note: The truncate() sys call is unique as it is the only one that can change the contents of a file w/o obtaining a descriptor for the file through a different call. 

## Nonblocking I/O
Specifying the O_NONBLOCK flag when opening a file serves 2 purpose:
- if file can't be opened immediately an error is returned instead of blocking
- after successful open() subsequent I/O operations are also nonblocking. 


## I/O on Large Files
*Large File Summit(LFS)*
2 application designs for LFS applications:
- Use an alternative API that supports large files
- Define the _FILE_OFFSET_BITS macro with the value 64 when compiling our programs. (The preferred approach bc no changes to source code necessary)

The transitional LFS API new data types:
- struct stat64: an analog of the stat structure allowing for large file sizes
- off64_t: a 64-bit type fo representing file offsets.

The *recommended method of obtaining LFS functionality* is to define the macro #_FILE_OFFSET_BITS with value 64 when compiling. 

## The /dev/fd Directory
On Linux - opening one fo the files in dev/fd is equivalent to reopening the original file. 

Using /dev/fd allows the specification of standard input, output and error as filename arguments to any program requiring them. 

## Creating Temporary Files
*mkstemp()* function generates a unique filename based on a template supplied by the caller and opens the file, returning a file descriptor that can be used with I/O system calls.
*tmpfile()* function creates a uniquely named temporary file that is opened for reading and writing.  On success, tmpfile() returns a file stream that can be used with the stdio library functions. The temporary file is automatically deleted when it is closed. (Behind the scenes - tmpfile makes an internal call to unlink() to remove the filename immediately after opening the file)

## Summary
- open() O_EXCL flag allows the caller to ensure that it is the creator of a file
- open() O_APPEND flag ensures that multiple processes appending data to the same file don't overwrite each other's output.
- The truncate() and ftruncate() sys calls can be used to decrease the size of a file, discarding the excess bytes, or to increase the size, padding with a zero-filled file hole. 
- The numbered files in the /dev/fd virtual directory allow a process to access its own open files via file descriptor numbers, which can be particularly useful in shell commands. 
 
## Exercises

5-1
fileoffset.c

5-2 
The data is appended to the end of the file because the O_APPEND flag tells write to ignore the offset value and atomically seek to the end of the file then perform the write. 
 
5-3
-rw------- 1 katie katie 2000000 Feb 26 13:39 f1
-rw------- 1 katie katie 1000000 Feb 26 13:42 f2
A difference of half! F2 is short by the times that seek was not asynchronous with write.

5-6
fd1 = open(file, O_RDWR | O_CREAT | O_TRUNC, S_IRUSR | S_IWUSR);
- Begin process to create a new file descriptor for file with read/write access.
- If file does not exist it is created with user permissions.
- If file already exists, truncate the contents of file.
fd2 = dup(fd1);
- Begin process to duplicate the file descriptor "fd1". fd2 would share the same offset/flags as fd1.
fd3 = open(file, O_RDWR);
- Began process to create a new file descriptor (fd3) + open with read/write permissions.
- If file does nto exist, it will not be created.
write(fd1, "Hello,", 6);
- Write string "Hello" at current position in file.
write(fd2, " world", 6);
- write "world" after new offset.
lseek(fd2, 0, SEEK_SET);
- Reset file offset to start of file.
write(fd1, "HELLO,", 6);
- Hello changed to HELLO
write(fd3, "Gidday", 6);
- HELLO changed to Gidday
