# Sockets: Introduction

## Overview
Sockets allow communication between applications on the same host or on different host connected via a network. 

fd = socket(domain, type, protocol);
Typical steps:
- A typical stream socket server creates its socket using socket()
- then binds the socket to a well-known address using bind()

**Communication domains**
A socket exists within a communication domain, which determines the range of communication and the address format used to identify the socket. SUSv3 specifies the UNIX (AF_UNIX), IPv4 (AF_INET), and IPv6 (AF_INET6) communication domains.

**Socket types**
2 types:
- stream: (SOCK_STREAM) provides a reliable, bidirectional, byte-stream, communication channel between two endpoints.
- datagram (SOCK_DGRAM) provide unreliable, connectionless, message-oriented communication.

**Socket system calls**
Typical steps:
- A typical stream socket server creates its socket using socket()
- then binds the socket to a well-known address using bind()
- the server then calls listen() to allow connections to be receive don the socket.
- Each client connection is then accepted on the listening socket using accept()
- which returns a fd for a new socket that is connected to the client's socket

- A typical stream socket client creates a socket using socket()
- then establishes a connection by calling connect(), specifying the server's well-known address


## Creating a Socket: socket()
The socket() system call creates a new socket. 
args:
- domain: specifies the communication domain for the socket
- type: specifies socket type (SOCK_STREAM or SOCK_DGRAM)
- protocol: specified as 0 for typical sockets
-
## Binding a Socket to an Address: bind()
bind: system call binds a socket to an address
args:
- sockfd: a file descriptor 
- addr: a pointer to a structure specifying the address to which this socket is to be bound
- addrlne: specifies the size of the address structure
- socklen_t: data type used for the addrlen argument is an integer type specified by SUSv3

## Generic Socket Address Structure: struct sockaddr

struct sockaddr {
    sa_family_t sa_family;  /* Address family (AF_*constant) */
    char    sa_data[14];    /* Socket address (size varies according to socket domain) */
};

Structure serves as a template for all of the domain-specific address structures. 

## Stream Sockets
Analogy: telephone connection
**Active and passive sockets**
Active: Default for a socket that has been created. An active socket can be used in a connect() call to establish a connection to a passive socket. Active open.
Passive: One that has been marked to allow incoming connections by calling listen(). Accepting an incoming connection is referred to as performing a passive open. 

client == application that performs the active socket open
server == application that performs the passive socket open

**Listening for Incoming Connections: listen()**
listen(): marks the stream socket referred to by the file descriptor sockfd as passive. The socket will subsequently be used to accept connections from other (active) sockets. 
args:
- backlog: allows us to limit the number of such pending connections

**Accepting a Connection: accept()**
accept(): accepts an incoming connection on the listening stream socket referred to by the fd sockfd. If no pending connections - call blocks until a connection request arrives.

Key: accept creates a *new* socket which is connected to the peer socket that performed the connect().

**Connecting to a Peer Socket: connect()**
connect(): connects the active socket referred to by the fd sockfd to the listening socket whose address is specified by addr and addrlen.

**I/O on Stream Sockets**
After 2 stream sockets are connected, data can be transferred in either direction using read() and write()

**Connection Termination: close()**
Once all processes with a file descriptor referring to a stream socket endpoint have performed an implicit or explicit close(), the connection is terminated.

## Datagram Sockets
Analogy: Postal system

- Typical datagram socket server creates a socket using socket()
- then binds it to a well-known address using bind()
- to send a datagram, an app calls sendto() which takes as one of its arguments the address of the socket to which the datagram is to be sent
- In order to receive a datagram, an app calls recvfrom() which may block if no datagram has yet to arrived
- When socket is no longer needed - app closes it using close()

**Exchanging Datagrams: recvfrom() and sendto()**
Datagrams can be received using read() or using the socket-specific recvform() system call, which returns the address of teh sending socket.
A datagram socket client creates a socket using socket(), and then uses sendto() to send a datagram to a specified address. 

**Using connect() with Datagram Sockets**
Because datagram sockets are connectionless, the server's socket can be used to receive datagrams from any client. 

The connect() system call can be used with a datagram socket to set a peer address for the socket. 
After doing this:
- it is no longer necessary to specify the destination address for outgoing datagrams; a write() call can be used to send a datagram.
- only datagrams sent by the peer socket may be read on the socket