# Sockets: Fundamentals of TCP/IP Networks


## Internets
An internet is a network of computer networks.
Subnetwork/subnet: refer to one of the networks composing an internet.

TCP/IP has become the dominant protocol suite, supplanting even the proprietary networking protocols that were formerly common on local and wide area networks. 

Internet (uppercase I) is used to refer to the TCP/IP internet that connects millions of computer globally. 

*multihomed host* is used for ny host with multiple network interfaces which has a different network address for each of its interface.

## Networking Protocols and Layers
A *networking protocol* is a set of rules defining how information is to be transmitted across a network. Networking protocols are generally organized as a series of layers, with each layer building on the layer below it to add features that are made available to higher layers.

TCP/IP is a layered networking protocol suite. At the bottom layer of the TCP/IP protocol stack is the IP network-layer protocol. 
Transparency: each protocol layer shields higher layers from the operation and complexity of lower layers.

**Encapsulation**
Encapsulation is an important principle of a layered networking protocol. 
Key idea:  The information passed from a higher layer to a lower layer is treated as opaque data by the lower layer. 

## The Data-Link Layer
The *data-link layer* is the lowest layer of TPC/IP protocol layers that consists of the device driver and the hardware interface to the underlying physical medium. The data-link layer is concerned with transferring data across a physical link in a network.

Maximum Transmission Unit (MTU): the upper limit that the layer places on the size of a frame. 

## The Network Layer: IP
The *network layer* is concerned with delivering packets (data) from the source host to the destination host.
Performs a variety of tasks:
- breaking data into fragments small enough for transmission via the data-link layer
- routing data across the internet
- providing services to the transport layer

**IP transmits datagrams**
IP transmits data in the form of datagrams. All IP implementations must permit datagrams at least as large as the limit specified by IP's minimum reassembly buffer size.

**IP is connectionless and unreliable**
IP is connectionless, meaning that datagrams transmitted between source and destination hosts may take different routes across the nerwork. IP is unreliable, in that it provides no guarantee that datagrams will arrive in order or unduplicated, or even arrive at all. If reliability is required, then it must be provided via the use of a reliable higher-layer protocol (e.g: TCP) or within an application. 

**IP may fragment datagrams**
When an IP datagram is larger than the MTU, IP fragments the datagram into suitably sized units for transmission across the network. These fragments are then reassembled at the final destination to re-create the original datagram. 

IP fragmentation is considered undesirable - it can only be reassembled if ALL fragments arrive.

## IP Addresses
2 parts:
- a network ID (which specifies the network on which a host resides)
- host ID (identifies the host within that network)

**IPv4 addresses**
The original version of IP is IPv4 (32 bits). When an organization applies for a range of IPv4 addresses for its hosts, it receives a 32-bit network address and a corresponding 32-bit network mask. 

Special addresses:
- loopback address: (INADDR_LOOPBACK) conventionally assigned the host-name localhost. A datagram sent to this address never actually reaches the network, but instead auto loops back to become input to the sending host. Convenient for testing client and server programs on the same host!
- wildcard address: (INADDR_ANY): wildcard IP address is useful for applications that bind Internet domain sockets on multihomed hosts. 

Typically IPv4 addresses are subnetted (host ID --> two parts: a subnet ID and host ID).
Why? An org often doesn't attach all of its hosts to a single network. 

Each subnetwork being identified by the combo of the network ID + subnet ID = extended network ID. 

**IPv6 addresses**
In the early 1990s, a new version of IP, IPv6, was devised. The most notable difference between IPv4 and IPv6 is that IPv4 uses 32 bits to represent a host address, while IPv6 uses 128 bits, thus allowing for a much larger number of hosts on the world-wide Internet. Currently, IPv4 remains the most widely used version of IP, although in coming years, it is likely to be supplanted by IPv6. 

## The Transport ayer
Various transport-layer protocols are layered on top of IP, of which the most widely used are UDP and TCP.
2 widely used transport-layer protocols: 
- User Datagram Protocol (UDP) is the protocol used for datagram sockets
- Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) is the protocol used for stream sockets

**Port Numbers**
Port number differentiates the application on a host by providing a unique 16-bit port number. 

**Well-known, registered, and privileged ports**
- ssh (port 22)
- HTTP (port 80)
Central authority listing well known ports (Internet Assigned Numbers Authority)

Port numbers 0 - 1023 are *privileged* meaning that only privileged (CAP_NET_BIND_SERVICE) processes may bind to these port. 

**Ephemeral ports**
Ephemeral port is a short lived unique number that is assigned to an app that hasn't selected a particular port. 

**User Datagram Protocol (UDP)**
UDP adds just 2 features to IP:
- port numbers 
- data checksum to allow the detection of errors in the transmitted data

UDP is a connectionless and likewise unreliable datagram protocol.

**Selecting a UDP datagram size to avoid IP fragmentation**
With UDP we can easily cause IP fragmentation by transmitting a datagram that exceeds the MTU of the local data link.

A UDP-based application aims to avoid IP fragmentation by adopting a conservative approach, which is to ensure that the transmitted IP datagram is less than the IPv4 minimum reassembly buffer size of 576 bytes. In practice, many UDP-based applications opt for a still lower limit of 512 bytes for their datagrams. 

**Transmission Control Protocol(TCP)**
TCP provides a reliable, connection-oriented, bidirectional, byte-stream communication channel between two endpoints. 
TCP handles all of the details of connection establishment and termination. 

**Connection establishment**
TCP establishes a communication channel between the 2 endpoints. During connection establishment, the sender and receiver can exchange options to advertise parameters for the connection.

**Packaging of data in segments**
Data is broken into segments, each of which contains a checksum to allow the detection of end-to-end transmission errors. Each segment is transmitted in a single IP datagram.

**Acknowledgements, retransmissions, and timeouts**
TCP segment arrives without errors:
    - receiving TCP sends a positive acknowledgment to the sender
    - informing it of the successfully delivered data
TCP segment arrives with errors:
    - discarded
    - no acknowledgment is sent

To handle possibility of segments that never arrive or are discarded the sender starts a timer when each segment is transmitted. If an acknowledgement is not received before the timer expires, the segment is retransmitted. 

**Sequencing**
TCP also packages data into segments for transmission by IP, and provides sequence numbering for these segments so that they can be acknowledged and assembled in the correct order by the receiver.  

The ISN (initial sequence number) is a 32-bit value generated via an algorithm that increases the ISN assigned to successive TCP connections. Makes guessing ISN difficult. 

**Flow control**
In addition, TCP provides flow control, to prevent a fast sender from overwhelming a slow receiver, and congestion control, to prevent a fast sender from overwhelming the network.

**Congestion control: slow-start and congestion-avoidance algorithms**
Congestion control algorithms are important in 2 circumstances:
- After connection establishment: At this time the sender could start by immediately injecting as many segments into the network as would be permitted by the window size advertised by the receiver. The problem: if network can't handle this flood of segments, the sender risks overwhelming the network immediately.

- When congestion is detected: If the sending TCP detects that congestion is occurring, then it must reduce its transmission rate. TCP detects that congestion is occurring based on the assumption that segment loss because of transmission error is very low; thus, if a packet is lost, the cause is assumed to be congestion.

Slow-start algorithm: causes the sending TCP to initially transmit segments at a slo rate, but allows it to exponentially increase the rate as these segments are acknowledged by the receiving TCP. Attempts to pervent a fast TCP sender from overwhelming a network. If unrestrained, slow start's exponential increase in the transmission rate could mean that the sender would soon overwhelm the network. 

Congestion-avoidance algorithm: prevents the exponential increase created by slow-start algo by placing a governor on the rate increases. 

In combo - the slow-start and congestion avoidance algos allow the sender to rapidly raise its transmission speed up to the available capacity of the network, without overshooting that capacity. 

TL;dr: The effect of these algos is to allow data transmission to quickly reach a state of equilibrium where the sender transmits packets at the same rate as it receives acknowledgements from the receiver. 
