# Processes

## Processes and Programs
A *process* is an instance of an executing program. 
A *program* is a file containing a range of information that describes how to construct a process at run time. 
- *Binary format identification*: Each program file contains metainformation describing the format of the executable file. 
- *Machine-language instructions*: Encodes the algorithm of the program
- *Program entry-point address*: This identifies the location of the instruction at which execution of the program should commence
- *Data*: The program file contains valuies used to initialize variables and also literal constants used by the program 
- *Symbol and relocation tables*: These describe the locations and names of functions and variables within the program.
- *Shared-library and dynamic-linking information*: The program file includes fields listing teh shared libraries that the program needs to use at run time and the pathname of the dynamic linked that should be used to load these libraries.
- *Other information*: The program file contains various other information that describes how to construct a process. 

## Process ID and Parent Process ID

Each process has a unique process ID and maintains a record of its parent's process ID.

Process IDs are used and returned by a variety of system calls. The process ID is useful if we need to build an identifier that is unique to a process. 
*getpid()* system call returns the process ID of the calling process. 
*getppid()* system call returns the parent process ID of the calling process. 
If a child process becomes orphaned - the ppid returns 1.

## Memory Layout of a Process
- *Text Segment* contains the machine language instructions of the program run by the process. The text segment is read only and shareable.
- *Initialized data segment* contains global and static variables that are explicitly initialized. Values of these variables are read from the executable file when the program is loaded into memory. 
- *Uninitialized data segment* contains global and static variables that are not explicitly initialized.  *
- *Stack* is a dynamically growing and shrinking segment containing stack frames
*Program break* top end the heap.

## Virtual Memory Management 
The virtual memory of a process is logically divided into a number of segments: text(initialized and uninitialized), data, stack and heap.
*Virtual Memory Management* aims to make efficient use of both the CPU and RAM (physical memory) by exploiting a property that is typical of most program: *locality of reference*.

**2 kinds of locality**
- *Spatial locality*: tendency of a program to reference memory addresses that are near those that were recently accesses
- *Temporal locality*: tendency of a program to access the same memory addresses in the near future that it accessed in the recent past (because of loops)

*Benefit of locality of reference*: It is possible to execute a program while maintaining only part of its address space in RAM.

A *page fault* occurs when a process references a page that is not currently resident in physical memory. 

Benefit of VMM: more processes can simultaneously be held in RAM.
## The Stack and Stack Frames
The stack consists of a series of frames, with a new frame being added as a function is invoked and removed when the function returns. Each frame contains the local variables, function arguments and call linkage information for a single function invocation.
- The stack grows and shrinks as functions are called and return. 
- The stack resides at the high end of memory and grows downward (towards heap).

A *stack pointer* is a special purpose register that tracks the current top of the stack. 

*User stack* is used to distinguish the stack we describe here from the *kernel stack*.
The *kernel stack* is the per-process memory region maintained in kernel memory taht is used as the stack for execution of the functions called internally during execution of a system call. 

**User stack frame contains**:
- Function arguments and local variables
- Call linkage information

## Command-Line Arguments(argc, argv)
The command-line arguments supplied when a program is invoked are made available via the argc and argv arguments to main(). By convention, argv[0] contains the name used to invoke the program. 
*int argc* indicates how many command-line arguments there are.
*char *argv[]* is an array of pointers to the command-line arguments, each of which is a null-terminated character string. 

One limitation of command-line arguments is that these variables are available only as arguments to main().

## Environment List
Each process has an associated array of strings called the *environment list*.
When a new process is created, it inherits a copy of its parent's environment. 
The environment provides a primitive form of interprocess communication in the environment to transfer information from a parent process to its children. 

By placing values in its own environment - the shell can ensure that these values are passed to the processes that it creates to execute user commands. 

Each process receives a copy of its parent's environment list, a set of name-value pairs. The global variable environ and various library functions allow a process to access and modify the variables in its environment list. 

**Accessing the environment from a program**
The environment list can be accesses using the global variable char **environ.
The *getenv()* function retrieves individual values from the process environment. (returns pointer to value or NULL if none exists)

**Modifying the environment**
The *putenv()* function adds a new variable to the calling process's environment or modifies the value of an existing variable. 
The *setenv()* function creates a new environment variable by allocating a memory buffer for a string of the form name=value and copying the strings pointed to by name and value into the buffer. Does not change the environment if the variable identified by name already exists and overwrite has the value 0.  
*Note*: Difference between set and putnev() is that setenv() copies it arguments meaning that users can modify the contents of strings pointed to by name and value without affecting the environment (f overwrite has the value 0). 

The *unsetenv()* function removes the variable identified by name from the environment. 
The *clearenv()* function clears the environment of all name-value pairs and sets the value of the external variable environ to NULL.

**Note**: In some circumstances setenv and clearenv can lead to *memory leaks*

## Performing a Nonlocal Goto: setjmp() and longjpm()
The setjmp() and longjmp() functions provide a way to perform a nonlocal goto from one function to another (unwinding the stack). In order to avoid problems with compiler optimization, we may need to declare variables with the volatile modifier when making use of these functions. Nonlocal gotos can render a program difficult to read and maintain, and should be avoided whenever possible. 


*goto statement* is **occasionally** useful to make programs simpler/faster but is open to abuse in making programs difficult to maintain/read. 
Calling *setjmp()* establishes a target for a later jump performed by *longjmp()*. 

**Restrictions on the use of setjmp()**
- As entire controlling expression of a selection or iteration statement
- As the operand of a unary !(not) operator
- As part of a comparison operation (==, !=, <, and so on)
- As a free-standing function call that is not embedded inside some larger expression
These restrictions are specified  because an implementation of setjmp() as a conventional function can't be guaranteed to have enough information to be able to save the values of all registers and temporary stack locations used in an enclosing expressions so that they could then be correctly restored after a longjmp().

**Abusing longjmp()**
One should not do a longjump() into a function that has already been returned. It will lead to chaos! 

**Problems with optimizing compilers**
Optimizing compilers may rearrange the order of instructions in a program and store certain variables in CPU registers rather than RAM meaning that it cannot take setjmp() and longjmp() into account when performing its task. This can result in incorrect values as a consequence of a longjmp() operation. 
 
 **Avoid setjmp() and longjmp() where possible**
It is more beneficial to take extra time to design and code a program that avoids using setjmp() and longjmp() so that your program is more portable and readable. 

## Exercise

6.1
The command ls -l only shows the size of the file stored on disk but not everything that gets put into memory. 
