# Memory Allocation

## Allocating Memory on the Heap
A process can allocate memory by increasing the size of teh heap, a variable size segment of contiguous virtual memory taht begins just after the uninitialized data segment of a process and grows and shrinks as memory is allocated and freed.

*Program break*: current limit of the heap
**Adjusting the Program Break: brk() and sbrk()**
The *brk()* sys call sets the program break to the location specified by *end_data_segment*.
A call to *sbrk()* adjusts the program break by adding *increment* to it. 
The *intptr_t* type used to declare increment is an integer data type.
The call *sbrk(0)* will return the current setting of the program break without changing it ->helpful to track size of the heap.

**Allocating Memory on the Heap: malloc() and free()**
The *malloc* function allocates size bytes from the heap and returns a pointer to the start of the newly allocated block of memory.
If malloc failure occurs - returns NULL and sets errno to indicate the error. 
Advantage of malloc:
- are standardized as part of the C language
- are easier to use in threaded programs
- provide a simple interface that allows memory to be allocated in small units
- allow us to arbitrarily deallocate blocks of memory, which are maintained on a free list and recycled in future calls to allocate memory

The *free()* function deallocates the block of memory pointed to by its ptr argument.
In **general** free() doesn't lower the program break but adds the block of memory to a list of free blocks that are recycle by future malloc calls. 
Note: it is not an error to give free a NULL pointer. 

**To free() or not to free()**
Benefits:
- Explicitly calling free() may make the program more readable and maintainable in teh face of future modifications.
- Using a malloc debugging library to find memory leaks in a program, then any memory that is not explicitly freed will be reported as a memory leak. This can complicate the task of finding real memory leaks.

**Implementation of malloc() and free()**
Malloc:
- scans the list of memory blocks in order to find one whose size is larger than or equal to requirements
- If right size, returned to caller
- If block is larger, it is split so that a block of correct size is returned to caller and smaller free block can still be used 
- If no right size block exists, malloc calls sbrk to allocate more memory.

Free:
- The integer at the beginning of a block returns the location just past the length value. 
**Tools and libraries for malloc debugging**
- mtrace() and muntrace()
- mcheck() and mprobe()
- MALLOC_CHECK_ environment variable
A malloc debugging library offers the same API as the standard malloc package but does extra work to catch memory allocation bugs.

**Controlling and monitoring the malloc package**
- *mallopt()* function modifies various parameters that control the algorithm used by malloc.
- *mallinfo()* function returns a structure containing various stats about mem allocated by malloc()

**Allocating memory with calloc() and realloc()**
*Calloc()* allocates memory for an array of identical items but initializes the allocated memory to 0.
*Realloc()* resizes a block of memory previously allocated by one of the functions in the malloc package. 
In general - keep ralloc() use to a minimum. 

**Allocating aligned memory: memalign() and posix_memalign()**
*memalign() and posix_memalign()* are designed to allocate memory starting at an address aligned at a specified power-of-two boundary. 

*memalign()* function allocates size bytes starting at an address aligned to a multiple of boundary, which must be a power of two. 

**posix_memalign() differences to memalign*
- The address of the allocated memory is returned in memptr
- The memory is aligned to a multiple alignment, which must be power of two multiple of sizeof(void *)

## Allocating Memory on the Stack: alloca()
*alloca()* allocates memory dynamically. It obtains memory from the stack by increasing the size of the stack frame.

**Note**: DO NOT call free to deallocate memory allocated with alloca. 

Advantage over malloc:
- Faster (because alloca is implemented by the compiler as inline code that directly adjusts the stack pointer)
- Doesn't need to maintain a list of free blocks
- The memory allocated is auto freed when teh stack frame is removed
- Simpler coding!

Alloca can be useful when employing longjmp or siglongjump to avoid memory leaks like you would have when using malloc similarly. Alloca avoids this problem since stack is unwound by jump calls and allocated memory is auto freed.

## Exercises

7.1