# Users and Groups

*User Identifier (UID)*
*Group Identifier (GID)*
Each user has a unique login name and an associated numeric user ID. Users can belong to one or more groups, each of which also has a unique name and an associated numeric identifier. The primary purposes of these identifiers is to establish ownership of various system resources and permissions for access.

## The Password File: /etc/passwd

Contains one line for each user with seven fields:
- Login name (unique)
- Encrypted password
- User ID (if 0 - superuser)
- Group ID
- Comment
- Home Directory
- Login shell

A user's name and ID are defined in the /etc/passwd file, which also contains other information about the user. 
A user's group memberships are defined by fields in the /etc/passwd and /etc/group files.

## The Shadow Password File: /etc/shadow
The shadow password file was devised to prevent password cracking program attacks.
/etc/shadow can only be read by privileged processes and stores sensitive password information from the publicly available user information in /etc/passwd. 


## The Group File: /etc/group
The set of groups to wich a user belongs is defined by the combo of the GID in the user's password entry and the groups under which the user is listed in the group file. 
The group file contains one line for each group in the system with four colon separated fields:
- Group Name
- Encrypted Password
- GID
- User List

## Retrieving User and Group Information
Various library functions are provided for retrieving information from each of these files. 
**Retrieving records from the password file**
The getpwnam() and getpwduid() functions retrieve records from the password file. These return a pointer to a statically allocated structure. 
**Retrieving records from the group file**
The getgrnam() and getgrgid() functions retrieve records from the group file. 
*getgrnam()* function looks up group information by group name
*getgrgid()* function performs lookups by groupID.
Both return a pointer to a structure that is overwritten on each call to one of these functions.
**Scanning all records in the password and group files**
The setpwent(), getpwent() and endpwent() functions are used to perform sequential scans of the records in the password fie. 
The *getpwent()* function returns records from the password file, returning NULL he nthere are no more records.
The *endpwent()* function is necessary so that any subsequent getpwent() call will reopen the password file and start from the beginning. 
*setpwent()* can be used to restart from the beginning. 
**Retrieving records from the shadow password file**
- getspnam
- getspent
- setspent
- endspent

## Password Encryption and User Authentication
The crypt() function encrypts a password in the same manner as the standard login program, which is useful for programs that need to authenticate users. The crypt() algorithm takes a key of up to 8 characters and applies a variation of the Data Encryption Standard algorithm to it. The salt arg is a 2char string whose value is used to perturb the algorithm, a technique designed to make it more difficult to crack the encrypted password. 

To use crypt() on Linux we must compile programs with the -lcrypt option.

The *getpass()* function first disable echoing and all processing of terminal special characters. 

## Exercises

8.1
getpwuid() overwrites the statically allocated structure on each call which is why it is printed twice.
