# Process Credentials
Each process has a number of associated user and group IDs (credentials).

Identifiers:
- real user ID and group ID
- effective user ID and group ID
- saved set-user-ID and saved set-group-ID
- file-system user ID and group ID
- supplementary group IDs

## Real User ID and Real Group ID
The real IDs define the ownership of the process.

## Effective User ID and Effective Group ID
Unix: The effective IDs are used to determine a process's permissions when accessing resources such as files.
Linux: The effective IDs are used for other permission checks. 

## Set-User-ID and Set-Group-ID Programs
When *set-user-id* program is run the effective user ID of the process is set to that of hte owner of the file. This mechanism allows a user to assume the identity, and thus the privileges of another user while running a particular program. 

Common set-user-ID programs:
- passwd(1): changes a user's password
- mount(8): mount file system
- unmount(8): unmount file system
- su(1): allows a user to run a shell under a different user ID
- wall(1): write a message to all terminals owned by the tty group

When *set-group-id* is run changes the effective group ID of the process running a program.
## Saved Set-User-ID and Saved Set-Group-ID
The *saved set-user-ID* and *saved set-group-ID* allow set-user-ID and set-group-ID programs to temporarily drop and then later reassume privileges.

Root user - user ID: 0 is exempt from many of the permission checks normally performed when a process makes various system calls. 
## File-System User ID and File-System Group ID
Linux: File-system IDs are used for determining permissions for accessing files.

## Supplementary Group IDs
A process's supplementary group IDs are a further set of groups of which the process is considered to be a member for the purpose of permission checking. 

## Retrieving and Modifying Process Credentials
Various system calls and library functions allow a process to retrieve and change its user and group IDs.

**Retrieving and Modifying Real, Effective, and Saved Set IDs**

**Retrieving real and effective IDs**
- getuid : returns real user ID of calling process
- geteuid: returns effective user ID of calling process
- getgid: returns real group ID of calling process
- getegid: returns effective group ID of calling process

**Modifying effective IDs**
- setuid: system calls changes the effective userID
- setgid: system calls performs the analogous task for the corresponding group IDs

Rules that apply to setuid:
- When an unprivileged process calls setuid, only the effective user ID of the process is changed.
- When a privileged process executes setuid with a nonzero argument, then the real user ID, effective user ID and saved set-user-ID are all set to the value specified in the uid argument. 

Rules governing the changes that a process may make to its effective IDs using seteuid and setegid:
- An unprivileged process can change an effective ID only to the same value as the corresponding real or saved set ID.
- A privileged process can change an effective ID to any value.

**Modifying real and effective IDs**
The *setreuid* system call allows the calling process to independently change the values of its real and effective user IDs.
The *setregid* system call performs the analogous task for the real and effective group IDs.

Rules governing the changes that we can make using setreuid and setregid:
- unprivileged process can set real user ID to curreny value of real or effective user ID. The effective user ID can be set only to the current value of the real uesr ID, effective user ID or saved set-user-ID.
- Privileged process can make any changes to the IDs
- For both privileged and unprivileged processes, the saved set-user-ID is also set to the same value as the new effective user ID if a): ruid is not -1 AND b): the effective user ID is being set to a value other than the value of the real user ID prior to the call. 

**Retrieving real, effective, and saved set IDs**

- *getresuid*: system call returns the current values of the calling process's real user ID, effective user ID and saved set-user-ID in the locations pointed by its three arguments.
- *getresgid*: system call does the same for the corresponding group IDs

**Modifying real, effective and saved set IDs**
- *setresuid*: system call allows the calling process to independently change the values of all three its user IDs.
- *seteuid*: system call performs the analogous task for the group IDs

Rules about what changes *setresuid* can make:
- An unprivileged process can set any of ts real user ID, effective user ID and saved set-user-ID to any of the values currently in its current real use ID, effective user ID and saved set-user-ID
- A privileged process can make arbitrary changes to its real user ID, effective user ID and saved set-user-ID
- The file-system user ID is always set to the same value as the effective user ID.

Calls to *setresuid* and *setresgid* have an all-or-nothing effect. 

**Retrieving and Modifying File-System IDs**
- *setsuid*: system call changes the file-system user ID of a process to the values specified by fsuid.
- *setfsgid*: system call changes the file system group ID to the value specified by fsgid. 

Rules for setfsgid:
- An unprivileged process can set the file-system user ID to the current value of the real user ID, effective user ID, file-system user ID or saved set-user-ID
- A privileged process can set the file-system user ID to any value

**Note:** Use of hte setfsuid and setfsgid system call is no longer necessary and should be avoided in applications designed to be ported to other UNIX implementations. 

**Retrieving and Modifying Supplementary Group IDs**
- The *getgroups()* system call returns the set of groups of which the calling process is currently a member, in the array pointed to by grouplist. 
- The *setgroups* system call replaces the calling process's supplementary group IDs with the set given in the array grouplist.
- The *initgroups* function initializes the calling process's supplementary group IDs by scanning /etc/group and building a list of all groups of which the named user is a member.

## Exercises 

9.1

(a) real=2000, effective=2000, saved=2000, file-system=2000

(b) real=1000, effective=2000, saved=2000, file-system=2000

(c) real=1000, effective=2000, saved=0, file-system=2000

(d) real=1000, effective=0, saved=0, file-system=2000

(e) real=1000, effective=2000, saved=3000, file-system=2000


9.2
Not at the moment. The effective ID is not privileged but it could be made privileged with a system calls the can set the effective id or execution of set-user-ID/set-group-ID programs. 