# A Tutorial Introduction

Compile and run
$ gcc -o helloworld ./helloworld.c

#include<stdio.h> is a statement which tells the compiler to insert the contents of stdio at that particular place. stdio.h is the header file for standard input and output. This is useful for getting the input from the user(Keyboard) and output result text to the monitor(screen).

C is a general purpose programming language that has:
- Economy of expression
- Modern control flower and data structure
- Rich set of operators

C is not:
- "very high level" or big
- Specialized to a particular area of application

Fundamental C characters:
- Characters
- Integers
- Floating point numbers of several sizes

C Hierarchy of derived data types:
- pointers
- arrays
- structures
- unions

Expressions are formed from *operators and operands*.

Fundamental C control-flow constructions:
- cases(switch)
- statement grouping
- decision making(if-else)
- looping with termination at top (while, for)
- early exit loop (break)
- Termination at bottom loop (do)

Return types: basic types, structures, unions or pointers. 

Local variables are created "automatic" or anew with each invocation. 

C **does not**:
- have built in operations to deal directly with composite objects
- does not define any storage allocation other than static definition 
- no heap or garbage collection
- no input/output facilities - no READ or WRITE statements
- no built-in file access methods

C **does offer**:
- straight forward, single-thread control flow
- tests
- loops
- grouping
- subprograms (not multiprogramming)
- parallel operations
- synchronization
- coroutines

## Getting Started

Main is special - your program begins executing at the beginning of main. 

to compile a file
$ cc filename.c

To run a file
$ ./a.out

*printf* is a library function that prints the following output. Never supplioes a newline auto so many calls can be used to build up an output line.

A *escape sequence* like \n provides general and extensible mech for representing hard-to-type or invisible characters. 
\t for tab
\b for backspace
\" for doublequote
\\ for the backslash itself

Type 	Size (bytes) 	Format Specifier
int 	at least 2, usually 4 	%d
char 	1 	%c
float 	4 	%f
double 	8 	%lf
short int 	2 usually 	%hd
unsigned int 	at least 2, usually 4 	%u
long int 	at least 4, usually 8 	%li
long long int 	at least 8 	%lli
unsigned long int 	at least 4 	%lu
unsigned long long int 	at least 8 	%llu
signed char 	1 	%c
unsigned char 	1 	%c
long double 	at least 10, usually 12 or 16 	%Lf

## Variables and Arithmetic Expressions

C is a strongly typed language. This means that the variable type cannot be changed once it is declared.

ex:
    int number = 5;      // integer variable
    number = 5.5;        // error
    double number;       // error

To make a comment use the structure "/* */"

**All variables must be declared before they are used**

A declaration announces properties of variables - contains type name and list of variables
ex: int fahr, celsius
    int lower, upper, step;

16-bit integers are between -32768 and +32767

A float number is typically a 32 it quantity with at least six significant digits and magnitude generally between about 10^-38 and 10^+38

C provides several other basic data types besides int and float:
char: character- a single byte
short: short integer
long: long integer
double: double-precision floating point

Recommended:
- always indent statements
- write only one statement per line
- use blanks around operators to classify grouping
**Pick a style that suits you, then use it consistently**

Integer division *truncates* any fractional part is discarded. 

%d specifies an integer argument, so the statement
    printf("%d\t%d\n", fahr, celsius);
causes the values of the two integers fahr and celsisu to be printed, with a tab (\t) between them. 

*scanf* is like printf, except that it reads input instead of writing output.
The scanf() function reads formatted input from the standard input such as keyboards.

- %d ................. print as decimal integer
- %6d ................. print as decimal integer, at least 6 
- characters wide
- %f .................. print as floating point
- %6f .................... print as floating point, at least 6 characters wide
- %.2f ..................... print as floating point, 2 characters after decimal point 
- %6.2f ..................... print as floating point, at least 6 wide and 2 after decimal point 
- %o ........... octal
- %x .............. hexadecimal
- %c ................character
- %s ................ character string
- %% ................ for % itself

For example, if a function is not returning anything, its return type should be void.

## The For Statement
Added in the For loop example of the temperature conversion and then reversed it.

The *for* is usually appropriate for loops in which the initialization and increment are single statements and logically related, since it is more compact than *while* and it keeps the loop control statements together ni one place.

## Symbolic Constants
**Its bad practice to bury numbers in a program -- they convey little information to a reader and are hard to change systemtically**

A define line defines a symbolic name or symbolic constant to be a particular string of characters:

#define name replacement text ------> any occurrence of name will be replaced by the corresponding replacement text. 

## Character Input and Output
A **text stream** is a sequence of characters divided into lines; each line consists of 0 or more characters followed by a newline character. 
**getchar** reads the next input character from a text stream and returns that as its value.
c = getchar()
**putchar** prints a character each time it is called
putchar(c)
prints the contents of the integer variable c as a character.

operator ++ means to increment by one
ex: ++nc

opposite -- means to decrement by one

in this for loop:
    for (nc = 0; getchar() != EOG; ++nc)
        ;
    printf("%.0f\n", nc);

the body is empty bc all the work is accomplished in the test and increment parts but grammar *requires that a for statement have a body* thus the isolated semicolon acts as a *null statement*.

Double equals sign == is the C notation for "is equal to"
Single equals sign is an assignment variable

*Character constant* is a character written between single quotes ex: 'A'


## Arrays
*chars* are just small integers
char variables and constants are identical to ints in arithmetic expressions.
prototype example exercise
## Functions 
In C, a function provides a convenient  way to encapsulate some computation. 

Functions can appear in any order, in 1 source file or several but **cannot** be split in several files. 
Parameter == variable named in the parenthesized list in a function definition
Argument == value used in a call of the function

**A function need not return a value**


## Arguments - Call by Value
In C, all function arguments are passed "by value". The called function is given the values of it's arguments in *temporary variables* rather than originals.

**Why Call by value is an asset**
- Leads to more compact programs with fewer extraneous variables
- Parameters can be treated as conveniently initialized local variables in the called routine

## Character Arrays
The most common type of array in C is the array of characters. 

**Outline**
*Write a program that reads a set of text lines and prints the longest*
while (there is another line)
    if (it's longer than the previous longest)
        save it
        save its length
print longest line


## External Variables and Scope
Variables declared within main are private/local to main. No other function can have direct access to them.

Local variables in a function comes into existence only when the function is called and disappears when the function is exited. 


*Automatic variables* come and go with function invocation and do not retain value from one call to the next. If the value is not set with each entry they will contain garbage. 


*External* variables can be accessed by name by any function. Must be defined once outside of any function; this sets aside storage for it. 

**Common practice** is to place definitions fo all external variables at the beginning of the source file, and then omit all *extern* declarations. 


Usual practice is to collect extern declarations of variables and functions in a seperate file which is then decalred using the #include at the front of each source file. 

Note: RElying on external variables is problematic as it leads to programs with data connections that are not always obvious - variables can be changed unexpectedly and the program is hard to modify.
