# Types, Operators, and Expressions
Variables/constants: basic data objects manipulated in a program
Declarations: list the variables to be used and state what type they have/initial values
Expressions: combine variables & constants to produce new values

## Variable Names
Restrictions on names of variables:
- First character must be a letter
- Don't begin with an underscore
- Uppercase/lowercase are different

Traditional practice:
- Use lowercase for variable names
- Uppercase for symbolic constants

## Data Types and Sizes
char: a single byte, capable fo holding one character in the local character set

int: an integer, typically reflecting the natural size of integers on the host machine

float: single-precision floating point

double: double-precision floating point

short int sh; ----> 16 bits

long int counter; ----> 32 bits

**Unsigned numbers**
- always positive or zero
- obey the laws of arithmetic modulo 2^n where the n is the number of bits in the type

**Signed Chars* 
- value between -128 and 127

## Constants
*Character constant* is an integer, written as one character within single quotes, such as 'x'. The value is the numeric value of the character in the machine's character set.

*Integer constant* is a decimal, octal(value starts with 0) or hexadeicmal number(value starts with 0x). Always positive until you specify a negative sign.

Complete set of escape sequences:
- \a : alert(bell) character
- \b : backspace
- \f : formfeed
- \n : newline
- \r : carriage return
- \t : horizontal tab
- \v : vertical tab
- \\ : backslash
- \? : question mark
- \" : double quote
- \ooo : octal number
- \xhh : hexadecimal number

A *constant expression* is an expression that only involves constants and is evaluated during compilation rather than run-time.


String constants can be concatenated at compile team:
"hello," "world" is == to "hello, world"


A string constant = an array of characters meaning a string ends in a null character so physical storage is num of chars + 1

There is no limit to how long a string can be but the program has to scan the entire string to determine length. 

**strlen(s)** returns the length of its character string argument excluding the null character.

'x' != "x"
The former is an integer used to produce the numeric value of the letter x in the machine's char set. The other is an *enumeration constant*. 

**enumeration constant** is a list of constant integer values 
ex: enum boolean { NO, YES };

*Enumeration variables offer the chance of checking and so are often better than #defines.*

## Declarations
A variable may also be initialized in its declaration.

char esc = '\\';
float eps =- 1.0e-5;

An explicitly initialized automatic variable is initialized each time the function or block it is init entered; the initializer may be any expression.

*External and static variables* are initialized to zero by default

*Automatic variables* for which there is no explicit initializer have undefined(garbage) values. 

## Arithmetic Operators

The % (modulus) operator cannot be applied to float or double.

## Relational and Logical Operators

Same precedence
>
>=
>
<=
Equality operators
== and !=

Expression connected by && or || are evaluated left to right.

The numeric value of a relational or logical expression is 1 if the relation is true, and 0 if the relation is false. 

## Type Conversions
*In general* the only automatic conversions are those that convert a "narrower" operand into a "wider" one without losing information.
ex: converting an integer to floating point in an expression like f + i.
Expression that don't make sense are not allowed. 

If either operand is long double, convert the other to long double.
Otherwise, if either operand is double, convert the other to double.
Otherwise, if either operand is float, convert the other to float.
Otherwise, convert char and short to int.
Then, if either operand is long, convert the other to long. 

*Note*: Comparisons between signed and unsigned values are machine-dependent.

Conversions take place across assignments - the value of the right side is converted to the type of the left, which is the type of the result. 

Reversing the order of assignments might lose information.

Type conversions take place when arguments are passed to functions. 

Explicit type conversion can be **forced** in any expression with a unary operator called a cast:
ex: (type-name) expression

## Increment and Decrement Operators
Incremenet/decrement operators can be used as prefixs or postfix *however*
++n increments n **before** its value is used while n++ increments after the value has been used. 

Ex:
This
if (c == '\n') {
    s[j] = s[i];
    j++;
}
can be written as
if (c == '\n') 
    s[i++] = c;


## Bitwise Operators
C provides 6 operators for bit manipulation which can only be applied to char, short, int and long (despite signed or unsigned).
- & : bitwise AND
- | : bitwise inclusive OR
- ^ : bitwise exclusive OR
- << : left shift
- />> : right shift
- ~ : one's complement (unary)
## Assignment Operators and Expressions

## Conditional Expressions

## Precedence and Order of Evaluation