# Control Flow

## Statements and Blocks
An expression becomes a statement when it is followed by a semicolon. 

A semicolon is a *statement terminator*. 

Braces are used to group declarations and statements together into a *compound statement* or *block*. 

## If-Else
syntax
if (expression)
    statement 1
else 
    statement 2

The else is optional. 

## Else-If
syntax
if (expression)
    statement 1
else if (expression)
    statement 2
else 
    statement 3

## Switch
The *switch* statement is a multi-way decision that tests whether an expression matches one of a number of *constant* integer values, and branches accordingly.

syntax
    switch (expression) {
        case const-expr: statements
        case const-expr: statements
        default: statements
    }
A *default* is optional. 

A *break* statement causes an immediate exit from the *switch*.

*Break* and *return* are the most common ways to leave a switch. 

**Good form**: Put a *break* after the last case even though it is logically unnecessary - defensive programming ftw! 

## Loops - While and For

for (expr1; expr2; expr3)
    statement

The *for* is preferable when there is a simple initialization and increment. 
for (i = 0; i < n; i++)

The advantages of keeping loop control centralized are even more obvious when there are several nested loops. 

A pair of expressions separated by a comma is evaluated left to right, and the type and value of the result are teh type and value of the right operand. 
The commas that separate function arguments, variables in declarations, etc, are **not** comma operator and do not guarantee left to right evaluation. 
**Best practice**: comma operators should be used sparingly. Most suitable for constructs strongly related to each other. 

## Loops - Do-while

syntax:

do
    statement
while (expression);

## Break and Continue

The *break* statement provides an early exit from for, while, and do. A break causes the innermost enclosing loop or switch to be exited immediately. 

The *continue* statement causes the next iteration fo the enclosing for, while, or do loop to begin. Only applies to loops not switch. 

## Goto and Labels
**Formally** the goto is never necessary and *in practice* it is almost always easy to write code without it. 

syntax:

for (...)
    for (....) {
        ...
        if (disaster!!!)
            goto error;
    }
    ...
error:
    clean this disaster up!!

**Note:** Code written with a goto can always be written without one although it may mean repeated tests or an extra variable. 

**Avoid**: code that relies on goto statements is harder to understand and maintain. Just don't do it. 