# Functions and Program Structure
Functions break larger computing tasks into smaller ones, and enable people to build on what others have done instead of starting over from scratch. 

**Generally** C programs consist of many small functions rather than one large one.

## Basics of Functions
*strindex* search position of a character in a string

The return statement is the mechanism for returning a value from the called function to its caller. Any expression can follow return:
    return expression;

The expression will be converted to the return type of the function if necessary. Parentheses are optional around the expression. 

If a function fails to return a value, its "value" is certain to be garbage. 

## Functions Returning Non-integers

**Atof** - a function in the C programming language that converts a string into a floating point numerical representation. 

Atof must declar the type of value it returns since it is not int. The type name precedes the function name:

ex: double atof(char s[])

The function atof must be declared and defined consistently. If there is an inconsistency in the same file it will be detected by the compiler but if in separate files it would not be detected and meaningless results occur!

**Note**: A mismatch can occur if there is no function prototype, a function is implicitly declared by its first appearance in an expression.

**Bad idea**: to use empty argument lists with newer C programs. This is only intended to permit older C programs to compile with new compilers. 

## External Variables
**External variables** are defined outside of any function and available to many functions. 

Because external variables are globally accessible they are an alternative to function arguments are return values for communicating data between functions. 

Pros of external variables:
- greater scope
- lifetime (permanent and retain values from one function invocation to another)

*getch* delivers the next input character to be considered.
-  reads from the bugger if there is anything, calls getchar if buffer is empty

*ungetch* remembers the characters put back on the input, so that subsequent calls to getch will return them before reading new input 
- puts the pushed-back characters into a shared buffer - a character array

## Scope Rules
The functions and external variables that make up a C program need not all be compiled at the same time; the source text can be kept in several files. 

*Scope* is the name of the area of the program which the variable can be used. 

An *extern* declaration is necessary if an external variable is defined in a different source file from the one it is being used in. 
ex:
extern int sp;
extern double val[];

There must only be one *definition* of an external variable among all the files that make up the source program; other files may contain *extern* declarations to access it. 

## Header Files

**Tradeoff** if files have access only to the information it needs for its job the tradeoff is that it is harder to maintain more header files. 

## Static Variables

*Static* declaration limits the scope of that object to the rest of the source file being compiled.
    - the name is invisible outside of the file it is declared in
    - are local to a particular function 
    - remain in existence 
**TLDR** Internal static variables provide private, permanent storage within a single function. 

## Register Variables

A *registration* declaration advises the compiler that the variable in question will be heavily used.
- may result in smaller and faster programs

ex:
register int x;
register char c;

f(register unsigned m, register long n)
{
    registered int i;
    ...
}

Takeaways
- only a few variables in a function can be a register
- only certain types are allowed

## Block Structure
While C is not a block-structure language you can define variables in a block-structured fashion within a function. 

- An *automatic variable* declared and initialized in a block is initialized each time the block is entered. 
- A *static variable* is initialized only the first time the block is entered. 

**Note**: Avoid variable names that conceal names in an outer scope - the potential to confused/error is TOO GREAT.

## Initialization
**Rules**
- External/static variables are guaranteed to be initialized to zero without explicit initialization 
- External/static variables must have an initializer that is a constant expression
- External/static variables has an initialization done once before the program begins execution
- Automatic/register variables have undefined (GARBAGE!) initial values
- Automatic/register variables initialization is done each time the function or block is entered
- Automatic/register variables have an initializer that is not restricted to being a constant 

char pattern[] = "ould" **is equivalent to** char pattern[] = { 'o', 'u', 'l', 'd', '\0'}

## Recursion
**Recursion** a function may call itself either directly or indirectly.

**Pros/Con**
- provide no saving in storage (since a stack of values being processed must be maintained)
- won't be faster
- More compact
- Easier to write and understand

Recursion is especially convenient for recursively defined data structures like trees. 

Common examples of where recursion is used :

- Walking recursive data structures such as linked lists, binary trees, etc.
- Exploring possible scenarios in games such as chess


## The C Preprocessor
#include: to include the contents of a file during compilation
#define: to replace a token by an arbitrary sequence of characters

**File Inclusion**
#include is the preferred way to tie the declarations together for a large program. Guarantees that all the source files will be supplied with the same definitions and variable declarations. 

**Macro Substitution**
#define *name* *replacement text*
Macro substitution - subsequent occurrences of the token *name* will be replaced by the *replacement text*


**Conditional Inclusion**
ex:
#if SYSTEM == SYSV
    #define HDR "sysv.h"
...
endif
#include HDR

It is possible to control preprocessing itself with conditional statements that are evaluated during preprocessing. 