# Structures
A **structure** (alt name: record) is a collection of 1 or more variables that are grouped together under one name for convenience in handling. 

## Basic of Structures
2 components can be placed in a structure declared like this:

struct point {
    int x;
    int y;
};

**Members** are variables named in a structure. A member and a non-member variable can have the same name because the difference can be understood by context. 

A variable declaration with structure declaration:
struct Point
{
    int x, y;
} p1; <--- The variable p1 is declared with Point

An member of a particular structure is referred to in an expression by a construction of the form:
structure-name.member
A *struct declaration* defines a type. 

EX:
struct rect {
    struct point pt1;
    struct point p2;
};

struct rect screen;
screen.pt1.x

**Note:** Structure members cannot be initialized with declaration because when a datatype is declared no memory is allocated for it. 
Ex:
struct Point
{
    int x = 0; // will have a compiler error!
}
## Structures and Functions
*Legal Operations on a structure*
- copying a structure 
- assigning to a structure as a unit
- taking its address with &
- accessing its members

Structures **cannot** be compared. 

It is generally more efficient to pass a function a pointer to a structure rather than copying the entire structure. They work the same as pointers to ordinary variables!

**Top of precedence hierarchy**
- .
- ->
- ()
- []

## Arrays of Structures
The structure declaration

struct key {
    char *word;
    int count;
} keytab[NKEYS];

ex:
struct key {
    char *word;
    int count;
} keytab[] = {
    {"auto", 0},
    {"break", 0},
    {"case", 0},
    {"char", 0},
    {"const", 0},
    {"continue", 0},
    {"default", 0},
    /*...*/
    {"unsigned", 0,
    {"void, 0},
    {"volatile", 0},
    {"while", 0}
};

*Note*: The inner braces around the keys are not necessary when initializers are simple variables or char strings.

#define NKEYS (sizeof keytab / sizeof(struct key))

another way....
#define NKEYS (sizeof keytab / sizeof keytab[0])  <--- advantage: does not need to be changed if the type changes

## Pointers to Structures

(keytab exercise example)
## Self-referential Structures

Problem: How can we organize the data to cope efficiently withb a list of arbitrary words?
1 solution:: keep the set of words seen so far sorted at all times.
**The solution**: Use a binary tree!

**Binary Tree**
A tree contains one node per word & each node contains:
- a pointer to the text of the word
- a count of the number of occurences
- a pointer to the left child node
- a pointer to the right child node

*Rules*
- No node may have more than 2 children nodes
- Might have only zero or one

Comparing against root you can use recursion to solve the problem. 

Worst case big-0: linear search (if words are in order)
(exercise addtree)


**A Note:** It is desirable that there be only one storage allocator in a program, even though it allocates different kinds of objects. But this raises 2 questions:
- How does it meet the requirement of most real machines?
- What declarations can cope with the fact that an allocator must necessarily return different kind of pointers?
Alignment requirements can generally be satisfied easily, at the cost of some wasted space, by ensuring that the allocator always returns a pointer that means *all* alignment restrictions.

**In C** the proper method is to declar that malloc returns a pointer to void, then explicitly coerce the pointer into the desired type with a cast.

## Table Lookup

install(s,t) <--- records the name s and the replacement text t in a table; s and t are just char strings

lookup(s) <--- searches for s in the table, and returns a pointer to the place where it was found, or NULL if it wasn't there

struct nlist { 
    struct nlist *next;
    char *name;
    char *defn;
};

/* 
table entry
next entry in chain
defined name
replacement text
*/


## Typedef
C provides a facility called *typedef* for creating new data type names.
typedef int Length; <-- makes the name Length a synonym for int
That means the type Length can be used in declarations, casts,etc
Ex:
Length len, maxlen;
Length *lengths[];

**typedef declaration does not create a new type in any sense;** it just adds a new name for an existing type.


**Why use?**
- Typedef is like #define, except it is interpreted by the compilier meaning that it can compile with textual substitutions. 
- Ability to paramterize a program against portability problems
- Provide better documentation for a program and readability 

## Unions
A *union* is a variable that may hold objects of different types & sizes with the compiler keeping tracks of size and alignment requirements.

Unions are a way to manipulate different kinds of data in a single area of storage, without embedding machine-dependent info in the program. 

Ex: Suppose that a constant may be an int, a float, or a character pointer. The value of a particular constant must be stored in a variable of the proper type, amount of storage and is stored in teh same place regardless of its type.

**Syntax**:

union u_tag {
    int ival;
    float fval;
    char *sval;
} u;

The variable u will be large enough to hold the largest of 3 types - the specific size is *implementation-dependent*.

It is the programmer's responsibility to keep track of which type is currently stored in the union. 

**Access**
syntax:
union-name.member
or
union-pointer->member

*Nested structure*
syntax:
symtab[i].u.ival
or 
*symtab[i].u.sval
or
symtab[i].u.sval[0]

Unions may occur in structures/arrays & vice-versa. 

**In effect**
- a union is a structure in which all members have offset zero from the base
- the structure is big enough to hold the "widest" memebr
- the alignment is appropriate for all of the types in the union
*permitted operations*:
- assignment to or copying as a unit
- taking the address
- accessing a member

## Bit-fields

*When to use* --> When storage space is at a premium it may be necessary to pack several objects into a single machine word

Define a set of "masks" corresponding to the relevant bit positions. 
**Syntax:**
#define KEYWORD 01
#define EXTERNAL 02
#define STATIC 04
or
enum { KEYWORD = 01, EXTERNAL = 02, STATIC = 04 };

**Note:** Numbers must bae powers of two.

flags |= EXTERNAL | STATIC; --> turns on External and static bits in flags
flags &= ~(EXTERNAL | STATIC); --> turns them off
if ((flags & (EXTERNAL |STATIC)) == 0)... --> if true turns both bits off

The syntax of field definition and access is based on structures.
**Syntax:**
struct {
    unsigned int is_keyword : 1;
    unsigned int is_extern : 1;
    unsigned int is_static : 1;
} flags;
and can be accessed the same was as other structure members (flags.is_keyword, flags.is_extern)

flags.is_extern = flags.is_static = 1; --> turn bits on
flags.is_extern = flags.is_static = 0; --> turn bits off
if (flags.is_extern == 0 && flags.is_static == 0) --> to test them

**Almost everything about fields is implemntation dependent.**

*Useful*
- for maintaing internally-defined data structures
*Drawback*
- programs that depend on them are not portable

