# Input and Output

## Standard Input and Output
*getchar* returns the next input character each time it is called, or EOF when it encounters end of file. The symbolic constant EOF is defined in <stdio.h>
Input can be redireted if prog uses getchar:
prog <infile
otherprog | prog
*putchar* puts the character on the standard output which is by default the screen
Output can be directed to a file if the program uses putchar as:
prog >outfile
prog | anotherprog

## Formatted Output- Printf
The output function *printf* translates internal values to characters. 
printf converts, formats, and prints its arguments on the standard output under control of the format. Returns the number of characters printed. 

**2 types of format string's objects:**
- Ordinary characters (which are copied to the output stream)_
- Conversion specifications (which causes conversion and printing of the next successive arguments to printf) <-- begins with a % and ends with a conversion char

Between the % and the conversion character there may be (in order):
- A minus sign (specifics lef adjustment of the converted argument)
- A number that specifices the minimum field width (converted arg will be printed in a field at least this wide)
- A period (seperates the field width from the precision)
- A number, the precision, that specifies the maximum number of characters to be printed from a string, or the number of digits after the decimal point of a floating-point value, or the minimum number of digits for an integer. 
- An h if the integer is to be printed as a short, or 1 (letter ell) if as a long

**Basic Printf Conversions**

| Character               | Argument Type; Printed as  
|-------------------------|----------------------------
| d,i                     | int; decimal number        
| o                       | int; unsigned octal number (w/o a leading 0) 
| x, X                    | int; unsigned hexadecimal # (w/o leading 0x or 0X) 
| u                       | int; unsigned decimal number             
| c                       | int; single character           
| s                       | char *; print characters from the string until a '\0' or the number of characters given by the precision             
| f                       | double;[-]m.ddddd, where the number of d's is given by the precision (default 6)            
| e, E                    | double;[-]m.ddddde+_xx or [-]m.dddddE+-xx, where the number of d's is given by the precision (defayult 6)             
| g, G                    | double; use %e or %E if the exponent is less than -4 or greater than or equal to the precision; otherwise use %f. Trailing zeros and a trailing decimal point are not printed.             
| p                       | void *; pointer (implementation-dependent representation)           
| %                       | no argument is converted; print a %.             


The function sprintf does the same conversions as printf does, but stores the output in a string:
int sprintf(char *string, char *format, arg1, arg2,...)

## Variable-length Argument Lists
The proper declaration for printf is...
int printf(char *fmt, ...)

Minimal version of printf exercise minprintf.c
## Formatted Input-Scanf
int scanf(char *format, ...)
*scanf* reads characters from the standard input, interprets them according to the specifications in format, and stores the results through the remaining arguments.

**Scanf stops when:**
- when it exhausts its format string
- when some input fails to match the control specifications

**sscanf** reads from a string instead of the standard input:
    int sscanf(char *string, char *format, arg1, arg2,...)
Scans string then stores the resulting values based on arguments (arguments must be pointers)
Acceptable format string:
- Blanks or tabs, which are ignored
- Ordinary characters (not %)
- Conversion specifications, consisting of the character %, an optional assignment suppression char *, an option # specifying a maximum field width, an option h, l, or L indicating the width of the target, and a conversion character

| Character               | Argument Type; Printed as  
|-------------------------|----------------------------
| d                       | decimal integer; int *
| i                       | integer; int *. The integer may be octal (leading 0) or hexadecimal (leading 0x or 0X)       
| o                       | octal integer (w/ or w/o leading 0s); int *. 
| u                       | unsigned decimal integer; unsigned int *.
| x                       | hexadecimal integer (w/ or w/o leading 0x or 0X); int *.            
| c                       | chars; char*. The next input chars(default 1) are placed at the indicated spot. The normal skip over white space is suppressed; to read the next non-white space character, use %1s.          
| s                       | character string (not quoted); char *, pointing to an array of characters large enough for the string and a terminating '\0' that will be added. 
| e, f, g                 | floating-point number with optional sign, optional decimal point and optional exponent; float *.          
| %                       | literal %; no assignment is made.              

A preceding h before d, i, o, u and x indicate a pointer to short rather than int. 
A preceding l before d, i, o, u and x would indicate a pointer to long.
A preceding l before e, f and g would indicate that a pointer to double rather than float.


**A final warning**: the arguments to scanf and sscanf *must* be pointers.

## File Access
*cat* is used for printing files on the screen.
Ex:
cat x.c y.c <-- prints the contents of the files x.c and y.c on the standard output

**Rules**
Before a file can be read or written it must be *opened* by the library function fopen.

*fopen* takes an external name like x.c or y.c, internal processes then returns a file pointer to be used in future operations.

*file pointer* points to a structure containing info about the file (location of buffer, current character position in buffer, whether its been read/written and whether errors or end of file have occurred)

**Allowable modes**
- r : read
- w : write
- a : append
*Note*: Some systems distinguish between text and binary files. Binary files require a "b" to be appended to the mode string. 

**Rules:**
- If a file doesn't exist when writing or appending it is created (if possible)
- Opening an existing file for writing will overwrite but appending will preserve old info.
- Errors can occur when trying to read a file that doesn't exist/you don't have permission to access


*getc* returns the next character from a file; it needs the file pointer to tell it which file.
int getc(FILE *fp)
*putc* writes the character c to the file fp
int putc(int c, File *fp)

getchar and putchar can be defined as follows:

#define getchar() getc(stdin)
#define putchar(c) putc((c), stdout)

## Error Handling - Stderr and Exit
Error handling in cat is not ideal.  This is where stderr comes in!
Output written on **stderr** normally appears on the screen even in the standard output is redirected. 

## Line Input and Output

*fgets* is similar to the getline function - it reads the next input line (including the newline) from file fp into the character array line. 
syntax:
char *fgets(char *line, int maxline, FILE *fp)

gets and puts are similar to fgets to fputs but operate on stdin and stdout.

## Miscellaneous Interface

