# The UNIX System Interface
The UNIX OS provides service through a set of system calls (functions within the operating system that may be called by user programs).

## File Descriptors
In UNIX OS *all input and output is done by reading or writing files*. 

**Proper Steps**
- In general before you can read or write a file you have to tell the system of your intent to do so (open a file).
- In general if you are going to write on a file you must create it or erase it's contents. The system will check if you can. If yes, you are returned a *file descriptor*. 
- The file descriptor is used (instead of name) to identify the file. 

**Redirect I/O to and from files with < and > 
ex: prog <infile >outfile

*In all cases* file assignments are changed by the *shell* not the program. The program does not know where its input/output comes/goes from. It only cares that is uses file 0 for input and 1 and 2 for output. 

## Low Level I/O - Read and Write

Read and write system calls:
1st arg - file descriptor
2nd arg - character array in your program where the data is to go or come from
3rd arg - number of bytes to be transferred 

Each call returns a count of the # of bytes transferred. 

**Reading - Possible Return:**
- 0 : implies EOD
- -1 : indicates an error of sort
**Writing** - the return number is the value fo # of bytes written. If not, indicates an error. 

## Open, Creat, Close, Unlink
*open* returns a file descriptor (which is just an int or -1)

EX:
fd = open(name, flags, perms);

**Possible Flags:**
- O_RDONLY : open for reading only
- O_WRONLY : open for writing only
- O_RDWR : open for both reading and writing

The system call creat is provided to create new files, or to re-write old ones.
ex:
int creat(char *name, int perms);
fd = creat(name, perms);
returns a file descriptor if it was able to creat the file, and -1 if not.
If the file already exists, *creat* will truncate it to zero length (discarding previous contents).

The function *close* breaks the connection between a file descriptor and an open file, frees the file descriptor for use with some other file.

Termination of a program via *exit* or return from the main program closes all open files. 

The function *unlink* removes the file name from the file system. 

## Random Access - Lseek
The system call *lseek* provides a way to move around in a file without reading or writing any data.
Ex:
    long lseek(int fd, long offset, int origin);
origin can be 0, 1, or 2 to specify that offset is to be measured from the beginning. 

With *lseek* it is possible to treat files more or less like large arrays, at the price of slower access. The return value from lseek is a long that gives the new position in the file, or -1 if an error occurs.

## Example - An Implementation of Fopen and Getc
## Example - Listing Directories
## Example - A Storage Allocator 