# Algorithms
Algorithm: A sequence of commands that if followed correctly will result in the desired outcome. 
To run or execute an algorithm means to apply it to input and obtain output.

## 6.1 Variables and the Assignment Command
A **variable** is a symbol that can be assigned to various values. It represents a specific value at any point in time and that value can change over time. 

## 6.2 Loops and Algorithm Notation
ex:
while P(x) do
    Command 1
    Command 2
    ....
    Command n
end

If P(x) is true then the while loop executes Commands 1 ... n which may change the value of x. It continues to execute until P(x) is false.
First iteration - first execution of the while loop and so on and so forth

    x := 1
    while x <= 6 do
        y := 2 * x
        output y
        x := x + 1
    end
    

    x := 1
    while x <= 6 do
        y := 2 * x
        output y
        x := x + 1
    end

    **Infinite loop**
    x:=1
    while x≤ 6 do
        y:=2·x
        x:=x−1
    end
    output y

    explain algorithms with comments ...... this is a comment

## 6.3 Logical Operators in Algorithms

while do
While Variable is true do
    command
end

if-then
If Variable is true then
    command
end

if-then-else
If Variable is true then
    command
else
    command 1
end

ex: 
if n = 0 then
    output1 ............................ because 0! = 1
else
    y := 1
    for i := 1 to n do 
        y := y * i
    end
    output y
end 

A *list* has multiple elements and are not stored in a single memory location in a computer but rather multiple locations. 

**Bubble Sort** -- Not efficient 
Input: A last X = (x1,x2,...,xn) of numbers
Output: The last sorted into numeric order
begin
    for k := 1 to n - 1 do
        for i := 1 to n-k do 
            if xi > xi + 1
                temp := xi ................ temporarily holds value of xi
                xi := xi + 1
                xi+1 := temp .............. now xi and xi+1 are swapped
            end
        end
    end
    output X ............................... now X is sorted
end


## 6.4 The Division Algorithm

**Division Algorithm**
Input: Integers a >= 0 and b > 0
Output: Integers q and r for which a = qb + r and 0 <= r < b
begin 
    q := 0 .................. so far we have subtracted b from a zero times
    while a >= b do 
        a := a-b ......... subtract b from a until a >= b is not longer true
        q := q+1 .......... q increases by 1 each time a b is subtracted
    end
    r := a .......... a now equals its original value, minus q b's
    output q 
    output r
end

Given integers a and b with b > 0, there exist integers q and r for which a = qb+r and 0 <= r < b.

ex:
a = -17
b = 3
a = qb + r
-17 = -6 * 3 + 1

## 6.5 Procedures and Recursion
*Procedures* are mini-algorithms that accomplish some task.

If an algorithms uses a previously-defined procedure we say the algorithm *calls* the procedure. 

*Recursive procedure* is a procedure that calls itself. *Recursion* is the situation.

ex:
Procedure RFac(n)
    begin
        if n = 0 then
            return 1 ................... because 0! = 1
        else
            return n * RFace(n-1)............. because n! = n*(n-1)!
        end
    end

## 6.6 Counting Steps in Algorithms
An algorithm should complete its task in the shortest amount of time possible, with the fewest number of steps. 

*Sequential search* traverses the list from left to right stopping when it finds the target or when the list ends.

*Binary search* works by continually maintaining two list positions left and right that the searched-for target must be between. 

**An algorithm that cannot finish quickly is of limited use, at best.**