# The Role of Algorithms in Computing
## Algorithms
An **algorithm** is a well-defined computational procedure that takes in a value (or set) as input and produces a value (or set) as output.
It can be a tool that is used to solve a computational problem. 

An **instance of a problem** consists of the input needed to compute a solution to the problem. 

An algorithm is said to be correct if for every input instance it halts with the correct output. 

### What kind of problems are solved by algorithms?
- Human Genome Project - determine sequences that makeup human DNA
- Manage and manipulate large volumes of data
- Finding optimal routes 
- Privacy of information - public-key cryptography and digital signatures
- Optimize flights in the least expensive way possible

**Characteristics of Algorithms**
- Many solutions possible
- Practical applications

A **data structure** is a way to store and organize data in order to facilitate access and modifications. No single DS works all purpose so must find optimal for the problem at hand. Consider the tradeoffs.

Some problems exist where an efficient solution does not yet exist (travelling salesman problem)

## Exercises
1.1: A real-world example that would require sorting is ranks based on a metric like score/points.

1.2: Another measure of efficiency could be cost-effectiveness. 

1.3: A Linked List strength is constant time insertion and removal and ability to grow large without requiring reallocation. A disadvantage is that list search is linear and memory requirement is high. 

1.4: Differences: Travelling salesman is between multiple points where as shortest path is between two points. 

Similarities: Requires optimization of possible routes 

1.5: A sort of any kind (like the ranking from above).
An efficiency problem such as best way to pack/unpack a box. 

## Algorithms as a technology

Computing time and space in memory is a bounded resource. 

Insertion sort is much less efficient on large lists in comparison to merge sort. 
In general as the problem size increases, so does the relative advantage of *merge sort*.

We should consider algorithms as a technology - Total system performance depends on choosing efficient algorithms just as much as hardware matters.

Algorithms are at the core of most technologies used in contemporary computers. 
