# Elementary Data Structures

## Stacks and Queues
Stacks and queues are dynamic sets that elements can be removed from. 


**Stacks**
Last-in, first-out
*Insert* operation on a stack is called *Push*
*Delete* operation on a stack is called *Pop*

```
STACK-EMPTY(S)
if S.top == 0
    return TRUE
else return FALSE

PUSH(S, x)
S.top = S.top + 1
S[S.top] = x

POP(S)
if STACK-EMPTY(S)
    error "underflow"
else S.top = S.top - 1
    return S[S.top + 1]
```
**Queues**
First-in, first-out

*Insert* is *Enqueue*
*Delete* is *Dequeue*

The queue has a head and a tail.

```
ENQUEUE(Q, x)
Q[Q.tail] = x
if Q.tail == Q.length
    Q.tail = 1
else Q.tail = Q.tail + 1

DEQUEUE(Q)
x = Q[Q.head]
if Q.head == Q.length
    Q.head = 1
else Q.head = Q.head + 1
return x
```
## Linked Lists
A linked list is a data structure in which the objects are arranged in a linear order. The order in a linked list is determined by a pointer in each object. 

Linked Lists are a simple, flexible representation for dynamic sets. 

Each element of a *doubly linked list* is an object with an attribute key and two other pointer attributes: next and prev

**Searching a linked list**

```
LIST-SEARCH(L, k)
x = L.head
while x != NIL and x.key != k
    x = x.next
return x
```
List search takes O(n) time as it may have to search entire list

**Inserting into a linked list**
```
LIST-INSERT(L, x)
x.next = L.head
if L.head != NIL
    L.head.prev = x
L.head = x
x.prev = NIL
```
List insert takes 0(1) time

**Deleting from a linked list**
```
LIST-DELETE(L, x)
if x.prev != NIL
    x.prev.next = x.next
else L.head = x.next
if x.next != NIL
    x.next.prev = x.prev
```

**Sentinels**
A *sentinel* is a dummy object that allows us to simplify boundary conditions. ex: L.nil

Implementations
```

LIST-DELETE'(L, x)
x.prev.next = x.next
x.next.prev = x.prev


LIST-SEARCH'(L, k)
x = L.nil.next
while x != L.nil and x.key != k

LIST-INSERT'(L, x)
x.next = L.nil.next
L.nil.next.prev = x
L.nil.next = x
x.prev = L.nil
```
Sentinels should be used judiciously - small lists do not need sentinels b/c wastes memory. 

## Implementing Pointers and Objects

**A multiple-array representation of objects**
We can represent a collection of objects that have the same attributes by using an array for each attribute. A pointer x is simply a common index into the key, next and prev arrays. 

**A single-array representation of objects**
The single-array representation is flexible in that it permits objects of different lengths to be stored in the same array. 

**Allocating and freeing objects**
We keep the free objects in a singly linked list, which we call the *free list*. The free list uses only the next array, which stores the next pinters within the list. The free list acts like a stack: the next object allocated is the last one freed.

*Push* and *Pop* can be implemented for freeing and allocating objects respectively. 

```
ALLOCATE-OBJECT()
if free == NIL
    error "out of space"
else x = free
    free = x.next
    return x

FREE-OBJECT(x)
x.next = free
free = x
```
These are two practical procedures that run in 0(1) time. 
