# Hash Tables
A *hash table* is an effective data structure for implementing dictionaries.
Average time: 0(1)
Worst case: 0(n)

## Direct-address Tables
To represent the dynamic set a *direct address table* can be used denoted by T[0..m-1] in which each position/*slot* corresponds to a key in the universe U.

A direct-address table can store the object in the slot itself which saves space.

Exercises:

1.1:
```
MAXIMUM(T, m)
    max = - infinity
    for k = 0 to m - 1
    if T[k] != NIL and max < T[k]
        max = T[k]
    return max
```
Worst-case would be 0(m) time

1.2: Utilizing a bit vector data structure to represent a dynamic set of distinct elements we can represent keys < m by a string of m bits, V[0..m -1], in which every position occupied by 1 relates to a key in S. 

*Downside of direct addressing*: If universe of keys (U) is large then storing a table T of size U may be impractical/impossible!

1.3:
Insert: Appends element to list in 0(1) time
Delete: removes element from the list in 0(1) time
Search: returns first element in 0(1) time

 
## Hash Tables
Hash tables requires much less storage than a direct-address table. You can maintain the benefits of searching in constant time without having bloated storage requirements. 

With hashing an element is stored in slot h(k) --> We use a *hash function* h to compute the slot from the key k.
h maps to universe U of keys into the slots of a *hash table* T[0...m-1]

h: U -> {0, 1,...., m-1}

h(k) is the hash value of key k
key k hashes to slot h(k)

A *collision* is when 2 keys hash to the same slot.
**Collision resolution by chaining**
In *chaining* we place all the elements that hash to the same slot into the same linked list

**CHAINED-HASH-INSERT(T,x)** 0(1)
insert x at the head of list T[h(x.key)]
**Chained-HASH-SEARCH(T,k)** 0(n)
search for an element with key k in list T[h(k)]
**CHAINED-HASH-DELETE(T, x)** 0(1)
delete x from the list T[h(x.key)]

Worst-case behavior of hashing with chaining is *terrible*: all n keys hash to the same slot creating a list of length n. 0(n)

All dictionary operations in 0(1) time on average

Exercises:
2.1: (n^2 - n)/ 2m
2.2:
| h(k)     | keys           |
|----------|----------------|
| 0 mod 9  |                |
| 1 mod 9  | 10 -> 19 -> 28 |
| 2 mod 9  | 20             |
| 3 mod 9  | 12             |
| 4 mod 9  |                |
| 5 mod 9  | 5              |
| 6 mod 9  | 33 -> 15       |
| 7 mod 9  |                |
| 8 mod 9  | 17             |

2.3:

Successful searchs and insertions have the same run times. Unsuccessful searches are performed faster but same overall runtime. Deletions are same as doubly linked lists 0(1)

## Hash Functions
**What makes a good hash function**
- Satisfies the assumption of simple uniform hashing:each key is equally likely to hash to any of the m slots, independently of where any other key is hashed to.
- minimizes the chances that variants hash to the same slot
-derives hash value in a way that expects to be independent of any patterns that might exist in data (division method)
**if keys are random real numbers k independently and uniformly distributed**
h(k) = [km]

**Interpreting keys as natural numbers**
If keys are not natural numbers we find a way to interpret them as natural numbers! (ASCII)
**The Division Method**
*Division method* creates a hash function by mapping a key k into one of m slots by taking the remainder of k divided by m.
h(k) = k mod m
When using the division method we can avoid certain values of m.
**The Multiplication Method**
*Multiplication method* for creating hash functions operates in 2 steps
1st: we multiple the key k by a constant A in the range 0 < A < 1 and extract the fraction part of kA
2nd: multiply this value by m and take floor of result
h(k) = [m(kA mod 1)]

**Universal Hashing**
*Universal hashing*  is to choose the hash function randomly in a way that is independent of the keys that are actually going to be stored --> can yield provably good performance on average.

**Designing a universal class of hash functions**
- Choose a prime number p large enough so that every possible key k is in range 0 to p -1
- Hvsubscript pm